VISWA BHARATI 


= 
— 
Ltn! 
= 
at 
‘aa 
— 
—< 
cs) 


: 
eewee 8 


1 
a @oneevwe ee © @ «4 


VARAHAMIHIRA’S 


BRIHAT SAMHITA 


a a 


Jee! 


WITH AN 
English Translation and Notes 
BY 


Panditabhushana V. Subrahmanya Sastri,.s. a. 
Asst. Secretary to the Government of Mysere (Retd.) 


aad Translator and Publisher of 
Brihat Jataka, Jatakaparijata, Sripatipaddhati, Phaladeepika, 
Jttarakalamrita, Shatpanchasika, Jatakalankara, Jataka Tatva, 
Jatahadesamarga, Sanketa Nidhi, etc. 


AND 


Vidwan M. Ramakrishna Bhat, m a. 


Lecturer tn Sanskrit and Superimuiendent of Indian Languages 
St. Joseph's College, Bangalore . 


@ 
PRINTED BY V. B. SOOBBIAH & SONS 
AT THE M. B. De ELECTRIC PRINTING WORKS 
BaNGALORE CITY 


1946 


Price Rs. 12/8 


Sole 1 roprietor of the Copyright : 


Panditabhushana V. Subrahmanya Sastyri, «-.., 


65, 3rd Cross Road, Basavangudi P. O. 
BANGALORE, 


INTRODUCTION 


RETTIG ED eA ip lI ES 


We are happy to present by the grace of God this 
edition of the Brihat Samhita of Sri Varahamibira with 
an English translation. A look at the table of contents 
will enable the reader to gauge the wonderful depth and 
wide range of the author's knowledge¥('In this monu- 
mental work which can rightly be called a Magnum 
Opus, there is no subject which he has not treated of 
with dignity, beauty and grandeur. This work, in fine, 
is a valuable encyclopaedia, as it deals with an astonish- 
ing variety of subjects of exceptional interest and value. 
Albiruni, the Arabian astronomer who has translated 
the @gata% (Laghu Jataka) of our author into Arabic, 
eulogises this a@tgar (Samhita) for its richness in details, 
It contains important astronomical data, geographical 
details, Architecture, Sculpture, Medicine, Psychology, 
Physiology, Physiognomy, Botany, Zoology, Prosody, 
figures of speech and other subjects. This work is un- 
ique in Sanskrit Literature. The author has made it 
extremely ‘interesting in spite of its dealing with technical 
subjects. \(The author isa poet of a high order. We 
can also observe here clear traces of the influence of the 
great poet [Kalidasa on this author. In fact aeftatee 
(Varahamihira) must have been an ardent admirer of 
Kalidasa. This fact probably led people to believe that 
our author was a contemporary of the illustrious poet. 
Moreover, in the satfafdgrata (Jyotirvidabharana), its 
author, a Kalidasa, says that he wrote it in 3068 of Kali 
Yuga or 33.8,c, and that he is a contemporary _of 
Varahamihirae This work bears; internal testimony i° of 


IV 


composition ata much later date. This pseudo-Kali- 
dasa apparently wanted to pass off for the real one and 
called himself a contemporary of Varahamihira. Varaha- 
mihira’s literary acknowledgment to Kalidasa will be 
appirent from the following extracts :— 


ANFaAa Ju qatea (Brihatsamhita LXX-23) 
Ma: ats aa WU cava walta 
(Brihatsamhita I1-) 

a gaat & aaa fray: (Brihat Samhita LXXIV-5) 
areag aa aafa aa matstarat (Brihat Samhita LXXV-3) 
wisa fafacaaia atts @ azqaeag( Brihat Samhita LXXV-4) 

and verses 7 and 8 (The whole chapter is excellent) 
aa ig qe giqzaqa: (Brihat Samhita LXXVIII-14) 

The verses 1 and 2 in Adhyaya LXXIV. 


All these lead us to believe in the author’s admira- 
tion for Kalidasa. The metres employed by him point 
to his mastery: of poetics and command of language. 
He gives various kinds of @98@ (Dandaka) and arat 
(Aryas)-) 


(The author is a staunch adherent of scientific princi- 
ples ia Astrology. Out of respect for the ancient sages 
or masters of this science, he quotes their views and_ then 
states his own confirmed decisions in unmistakable terms 
(vide IIJ-1, 2, V-1.17, and IX-6). He belongs to the 
group of first-rank scholars in scientific astronomy such 
as waaz (Aryabhata) #aga (Brahmagupta) and «leet 
(Bhaskara). [The last two are posterior to him]. Varaha- 
mihira does not claim to bea pioneer in the field of 
Samhita. Before him, Parasara, Garga and others had 


V 


written Samhitas. He refers to them and sometimes 
quotes them and gives his views in addition, for the 
benefit of mankind (vide I-5). The werataea (Parasara 
Tantra) is partly in prose and partly in verse of #ag7 
(Anushtub) and #tat (Arya) type- The geographical 
details given in Chapter XIV are taken with slight 
changes from this a#a (Tantra). So, it can be said to 
be the geography of India at the time of Parasara. 
According to tradition, it was Varahamihira that fixed 
‘the sphere at the beginning of Aswini (Cf. III-1). 


His style, though at times archaic, is simple, grace- 
fuland pithy, bearing the stamp of individuality and 
affinity to @wa (Susruta) and Kalidasa. That is the 
reason why he was ranked among the nine gems of the 
Court of Vikrama. ) 


‘> The author was the son of atfgaaia (Adityadasa) 
of Ujjain (%. at. XXVIII-9). The Astronomers of Ujjain 
have held that ate (Varaha) belonged to the 427th year 
of Saka era or 5054. D. This date is confirmed by Albi- 
runi also as that of the composition of his TaraquFaar 
(Pancha Siddhantika). But Dr. Bhau Dayji declares 
that awe (Varaha) died in 587 A.D. Hence it should 
be concluded that 500 A. D. is the date of his birth and 
not of his composition. Scholars hold that ag (Varaha) 
quotes wtawz (Aryabhata) who was born in 4764. D. 
This also points to the above conclusion regarding the 
date of his birth. >About the statement made in the 
satiatagrawa (Jyotirvidabharana) we can only say that 
it was not written by Kalidasa, the author of Raghu- 
_vamsa, etc. Probably there were many Kalidasas and 
one such was the one belonging to the 6th century a. D. 


V1 


For, the aaetTiargreg (Satrunjayamahatmya} mentions 
aking fasarze@ (Vikramaditya) as having ascended the 
throne in 544 A. be Probably at (Varaha) and this 
neo Kalidasa were contemporaries of this Vikrama. 
Similarly sede (Amarasimha) who is identified with 
aaiza (Amaradeva) that built the Buddha Gaya temple 
in about 500 a. D. is said to bea contemporary of our 
author. This too will lead to the above conclusion of 
his date. Many scholars from the days of Colebrook, 
Davis, Sir William Jones, Weber and Lassen have done 
much research work on Varahamihirg. 


(According te Sage Garga, the Science of Astronomy- 
cum-Astrology was created by the creator himself for the 
sake of the twice-born as ancillary to the Vedas. It was 
handed down to Garga by Brahman, and from him, 
other sages got it and thus its knowledge was dissem- 
nated throughout the world ’ 


It is but right that we draw here the attention of 
the readers to the erroneous judsment of many a wes- 
tern orientalist regarding Astrology and Greek influence. 
On the other hand,{it is the Greeks who freely borrowed 
or learnt the various scientific truths from the Aryans of’ 
India. Clement of Alexandria calls Pythagoras, the 
celebrated Greek, a pupil of the Brahmanas. The 
Swami Vivekananda, the vreat spiritual and intellectual 
giant of modern India, has ably refuted the false theories 
of the Western Orientalists. He says :— 


‘There may be, it is true some similarity between the 
Greek and Indian terms in astronomy and so forth, but the 

. westerners have ignored the direct Sanskrit etymology and. 
sought for some far-fetched etymology from the Greek. That 


Vii 


such shallow and biased learning has been manifested by 
many orientalists in the West is deplorable. From a single 
Sanskrit Sloka that reads, “The Yavanas are Mlechchas; 
in them, this Science is established; therefore, even they 
deserve worship like Rishis......... ’ in the west, they have 
gone so far as to declare that all Indian sciences are but 
echoes of the Greek; whereas a true reading of the Sloka 
may show that the Mlechcha disciples of the Aryan; are 
berein praised in order to encourage them to a further study 


9) 


of the Aryan Sciences......... : 


Only a sage can comprehened this Science, says 
our author (II-4). The present author does pay homage 
to the ancient authorities on this subject. He also just 
alludes to the various theories regarding creation pro- 
pounded by the Sankhyas, Vaiseshikas, Meemamsakas 
and others and passes on to the subject on hand\ The 
Science consists of three skandhas or branches, vtz, 
Ganita, Hora and Sakha (vide 1-9). The treatment of 
the whole subject in all its details is said to be @ftear 
(Samhita) which itself means a collection. Accordingly 
Garga says that the Great Brahman who is well-versed 
in these three branches is said to be an expert in Sam- 
hita. But our author points out that he hasalready done 
justice to two of the branches, viz., Ganita (ata) and 
Jataka (@1@@) in his val@eiaar (Panchasiddhantika) and 
Zesiat (Brihat Jataka) respectivety (vide I-10). He 
gives in the 2nd Chapter the details of the afsar (Sam. 
hita) thereby indicating that the term Samhita is inde- 
pendently used for the Sakha also by itself. But he 
gives a resume of the first two Skandhas also. P 


NC has been stated (CVII-13) that this work consists 
of 100 Adhyayas, in Slokas 3900 when converted into 


Vill 


wage (Anushtub) metre.) Out of the 107 Adhyayas now 
printed in this book, the chapters on (1) anraw%, (2) ait- 
wat, (3) amfaer, (4) fweawert, (5) farevas (6) vara 
sta® and (7) weargeact are apparently not his. These 
have been noted in their respective places. 


The qualifications of an astrologer (Adh. II) are 
really very high and not within easy reach of ordinary 
mortals. The author says that a king should employ 
a chief astrologer assisted by 4 others. He is of opinion 
that no eood people should live ina country where there 
are no good astrologers. The esteem in which the 
author holds them is indeed very great. He is equally 
strong in condemning pseudo-astrologers. 


The chapters on Omens give a great deal of useful 
information. If man is careful in noting them when he 
goes out, he will be forewarned about the results of his 
efforts. The author says that (XLVI-2) the evil omens 
are the results of man’s Karma in previous births and 
that they are intended to warn him. 


There isa whole chapter giving various types of the 
avai (Arya) metre containing their Ganas and Yatis and 
also many varieties of Dandakas. Verse (LXVIII-112) 
is an example of good poetry. 


The verse #a-aarg gaa: is very useful in finding the 
time that has clapsed since the reign of the Pandavas. 
But here there is a doubt in the next line of the verse, 
where he says so many years intervene between Yudhi- 
shtira and the commencement of the Saka era. Some hold 
different views regarding this w#. Some say that it 


1X 


refers to the fsa and others to the wivargaas, But 
in our opinion, it points to the latter. 


The chapter entitled faargvz% was composed by one 
faecqarat, eerie forms part of the agatear. Manu is 
said to be one of the 18 ancient authors of Samhita. 
In waafeat itself, Manu’s authority is recognised. This 
shows that Manu was a very ancient sage. 


The author quotes a number of authorities in this 
Science: Parasara, Garga, Vriddha Garga, Kasyapa, 
Narada, Pitamaha Siddhanta, Saura Siddhanta, Paulisa 
Siddhanta, Vasishta Siddhanta, Romaka Siddhanta, 
Vishnugupta, Asita, Devala, Rishiputra, Sukra (Bhrigu or 
Usanas), Maya, Brihaspati, Saka, Garutman, Saptarshi, 
Badarayana, Nagnajit, Saraswata, Savitra (a work), 
Shashtyabda (a work ?), Manu, Viswakarman, Vajra, Sri 
Dravyavardhana, Bharadwaja, Kapila and Kanabhuk. 
In other works of his, the author quotes the following : 
Satyacharya or Bhadatta, Manittha, Devaswamin, Sid. 
dhasena, Yavanacharya, Jeevasarman, Latacharya, Sim- 
hacharya; and Aryabhata. 


‘Some hold the view that Garga and Vriddha Garga 
are one and the same person. But in XIII-2 and 
XLVIII-2, he mentions Vriddha Garga by name. The 
quotations of Bhattopala, the commentator, also prove 
that they are different persons. Of XXXI. Vriddha 
Garga is referred to in the Mahabharata also. We are 
of opinion that they are different. The w#afeat which is 
otherwise known as gaara contains almost the same 
chapters with the same titles. In this work, there js a 


chapter entitled gagam dealing with the Yugas. Asita 
B 


xX 


who wasagreat astronomer cast the horoscope of the 
Buddha according to Hieuntsang. Kasyapa also was a 


very ancient sage, who dogs not mention the Romakas 
at all. 


From this work, it appears quite clear that aug 
had already written his tai@qneasr and the graas (I-10) 
According to him, the @t (Hora) should treat of horo- 
scopy, questions about journey and marriage. The 2- 
Faget et which is based on tha five Sidthantas has been 
. published with an English translation by G. Thibut in 
1388 Heseems to have written two other biz works, 
namely Brihat Yatra and Brihat Vivahapatala. He his 
also written three smaller editions of these, viz (*§ ?) 
aeiaas, squat and sgrawews, The Brihat Jataka 
is very famous, Bhattopila his commented upon it. 
One agtaz also s:em3 to have written a commentary on 
it. Albiruni speaks of a commentary onit by away 
(Balabhadra). This Balabhadra has written an inde- 
pendent astrological work from which extracts are 
quoted in the pages of Jatakaparijata. The ga#tv% which 
is also commented upon by Bhattotpala has been trans- 
lated into Arabic by Albiruni as already stated above, 
Only two chapters of this #gara® are now available. The 
aiat according to Utpala cantains 14 chapters. Dr. Kern 
has said that-a manuscript copy of this work was with 
him. The copy now available has only 7 chapters and 
goes under the name of ataatar. It is not complete eitner: 
Hence we may conclude that it might be the @qarar. 


_ We know nothingrabout the author's faargves. Owing 
to its utter absence, the commentator has probably in 


1 


troduced a chapter by faevaarai*. The author has writ. 
ten a @aradigat which is known to us only from the 
quotations of the learned commentator. 


The author’s son Z47aaq (Prithuyasas) was also a 
ereat astrologer. He has written the 9w2vm@taer and 
gam as far as we know. The latter is a_ very 
useful work giving many new ideas and has been utilised 
by Mantreswara in his Phaladeepika especially in respect 
of Ashtaka Varga (vide page 265 of that work). 


The present work has the commentary of Bhattot- 
pala which is very exhaustive and helpful. It gives 
valuable quotations from) many ancient authorities and 
the other works of the author. At the end of his com- 
mentary on the Brihat Jataka, he says that he finished 
his commentary on Thursday, the 5th day of the Bright 
half of the month of Chaitra in 888 of the Saka era-956 
A.D. Hehas commented upon the aiarat and also the 
aevaarer of gaat. His scholarship was deep and 
vast. He seems to have written a work WekIwararag 
in 75 stanzas. He has also written a work-aeglaat (see 
P, 439). He was well acquainted with all the ancient 
works on Astrology, Astronomy, Poetics, etc He is 
very frank. Where he is ignorant, he openly owns that. 
For example, in perfumery, he sayg his knowledge is very 
meagre. He holds our author in the highest esteem. 
Scholars all over the world should be grateful to this 
commentator for his having preserved by his quotations 


*According to one tradition, this is Varahamihira. himself 


. &s he was living in the Vindhyas before he went to the Royal 
Conrt. | - 


Xl 


many authors in this field whose works are now Jost. 
We are not pioneers in presenting an English translation 
of this great work. Before us, Dr. Kern and Chidam- 
bara Iyer have translated it. Byt those editions are not 
available now. Moreover, they are deficient im some 
respects. They do not also give the translation by the 
side of the text. 


We too might have nodded in certain places in 
spite of our care and scrutiny; for, we are also human 
beings and this is a very big work whose publication has 
necessarily extended over a long period. We have given 
notes under the translation wherever necessary and not 
grouped the notes in an appendix to avoid* the reader 
being put to inconvenience by referring to the concerned 
pages. 

The author says at the end of the work, the course 
of the work and the Slokas it contains. Here Sloka 
means a HFT or 32 syllables. 


It may not be out of place here if we tell the readers 
that in spite of the heavy cost of printing and paper, the 
price of this book has been kept sufficiently Jow in order 
to enable all classes of readers to have easy access to it. 
We take this opportanity to record our heartfelt thank- 
fulness to Mr. V. B. Srikantaiya, Proprietor, Messrs. 
V. B. Soobiah & Sons? Printers, for printing this huge 
work promptly in a spirit of cordial co-operation and 
service to the Goddess of Learning, in spite of the 
scarcity of labour and consequent hardships. 


_ BARGALORE, V. SUBRAHMANYA SASTRI.. 
27th December 1946. M. RAMAKRIGHNA BHAT: 2 


Adhyaya 


XX, 


CONTENTS. 


syaaareara:—Introductory 
ataeavqatsata:- The Astrologer 
sirzarae:-The Sun 
aeqares— The Moon 
wear—Rahu 
wraare:—Mars 

gaarz:- Mercury 
geeqraaiz:— Jupiter 

gearz:— Venus 
aaavare:-Saturn 
eqar:—Ketu 

aameaate:- A gasthya 
aaieart:-The Seven Sages 
gxla@atat:-Kurma Vibhaga 


aaaeqe-—Allotment of animate iad 


inanimate objects to the several 
asterisms 


aeareata:—Countries, People ok 


Things belonging to the domain 
of each Planet 
aeqaieata:- Planetary Conflicts 
aiangaamareara:—Conjunction of 


the Moon with Plahets or Stars... 


nzasnereara:-The years presided 
over by each of the planets ane 
their results 


syswmzereaia:-The Planetary tri-. 


angle 


105 
121 
127 
146 
155 
159 


166 
113 
184 


192 


195 


.204 


Adhyaya 
XXI, 
AXIT, 
XXIII. 
XXIV. 


XXV, 


XXVI. 


XXVIII. 
XXVIII. 


XXIX. 
XXX. 
XXXII. 
XXXIL. 


XXXII. 
XXXIV. 
XXXV, 


XXXVI. 


XXXVI. 


XXXVIIL. 
XXXIX. 
XL. 

XL. 


XiV 


masata—Pregnancy of Clouds - .... 
m¥areomegra:-Preonancy of the Air 
staqneara:—-The Quantity of Rainfall 


atfgoitaimeara:~Moon’s conjunction 
with Rohini 


eaitaatmeata:-The Moon’s conjunc- 
tion with Swati 


atraeraia.aa:~ The Moon’s con- 
junction with Ashadha 


araamq-The Wind Circle 

aaraanraa:-Sions of Immediate 
Rain 

Sy Asareqia:—Prognostics from 

Flowers and Creepers 

aqreanreaia:—The Indications 
at Dawn and Twilight 


ferzizsatnteata:- The Glow at the 
Horizon 


qarTsanrearya:—Sions of an Earth- 
quake 


sepreana-Ulkas or Meteors 
qnaasarnregra:—Halos ssh 
eqiqawanegia:~Signs of Rain- 
bows eae 
TeadaTTwamega:—An Aerial City .... 
afaquseasneata:-Mock Suns 
witeang- Haze 
faaiawernreata:- Hurricane 
aasiasq—Growth of Crops 
qsatawareara:—Classification of 
Substances 


Page 
207 
219 
221 


224 


237 


Adhyaya 
XLII, 
XLIII. 


XLIV. 
XLV. 
XLVI. 
XLVII. 
XLVITI. 
XLIX. 


LV. 
LVI. 


LVII. 
LVIII, 


LIX, 
LX. 
LXI. 


LXII. 
LXIII. 
LXIV, 

LXV. 


aqeeseara:—Fluctuation of Prices... 


gexeamatag- The Glory of Indra’s 
Banner 


aferaaiaia:-Lustration Ceremony -. 


aqaSsarae ary :- Wagtail 


SeqrareIta:— Portentous Phenomena... 


aqifaaea-Motley Miscellany 
geaearaq—Royal Ablution 
qeauny-Royal Crowns 
wEBAIA-Signs of Swords 


wgaat—Prediction through Limbs .... 


iqzewarnry -Characteristics of Pim- 
ples 

alegiaar-] louse- Building 

qeiwy_-On the Exploration of 
Water Springs 


qargaatata:-Treatment of Trees .... 


srera@erniegra:— Description of 
Temples 


ans Twareas:-On the Adaman- 


tine Glue 


maareanegra:— Description of 
Idols 


axazsaageata:-Ingress into the forest 
gfaararagitaeara:-[nstallation of Idols 


wreamtA-Signs of Cows 
aeangy—-Signs of Dogs 
ewesang-Signs of Cocks 
wasenySigns of Tortoises 
ainsang—Signs of Goats - 


Page 
312 


316 
333 
349 
344 
369 
379 
397 
396 


406 


418 
421 


458 
483 


49] 
501 


503 
518 
521 
526 
531 
532 
533 
535 


- Adhyaya 


LXVI. 
LXVIL. 
— LXVIIL 
LXIX, 


LXX. 


LXXI. 


LXXII. 
LXXIll. 
LXXIV, 

LXXV. 
LXXVI. 

LXXVII. 
LAXVITI. 


LXXIX, 


LXXX. 
_ LXXXI. 
LXXXII. 
LXXXIII. 
LXXXIV, 
LXXXV. 


LXXXVI. 


xVi- 


, Page 
- Sieavig-Signs of Horses we §=—s-538 
gfeesana-Sions'ofiElephants . ... 539 
geyeangy-Signs of Men — juss SDA 
qaaggersatg—Signs of the Five 
Great men wee =—«s867 
sraqreatg—Characteristics of 
Maidens woe §=—sOT8 
qeacseeattq—Omens from Slits of 
Garments wee = OB] 
araveata-Sions of Chowries wee «=—«d88 


sasang-Sions of Umbrellas wee =: 589 
eainaaneaty:-Praise of Women ... 591 
atavaeiaa- Winning of Affection... 597 


‘@lraiqaq—Erotic Remedies w. 609 


aeaqi%:-Preparation of Perfumes... 603 
geqraaraia:—Union of Man and 


Woman we §=§6. 613 
WaAaASATa—Signs of Couches 

and Seats wee 6.20 
watiiat-Examination of Gems ... 628 
yemeyta-Signs of Pearls wee = 6 32 
quwaTsana—Signs of Rubies w. 639 
awasartg—Signs of Emeralds... 641 


diveana-Signs of Lamps - we «641 
geasipeanag—Lokens of Tooth- 
Sticks w wee 612 


Omens : Section I 


argaaq-Omens through Birds and 
Beasts oe 645 


Adhyaya 
LXXXVIL. 
LXXXVIII 

LXXXIX 
XC. 


XCI, 


XCII, 


XCIII. 
_XCIV. 


XCV. 


XCVI, 
XCVII. 


XCVIIE. 


XCIX. 


xvii 
Page 
Omens : Section IT 
weavasa—The Circle of Quarters .... 669 


Omens : Section ITT . 
faeaq-On the cries of Birds and Beasts 680 
Omens : Segtion 1V 
waeq—The Circle of Dogs we 691 
Omens: Section V 
ferareaq-On the cries of Jackals ... 698 
Omens : Section VI 
wnafeaa~Omens connected with 
the movements of Wild Animals 701 
Omens : Section VII 
waigaq-The Intention of Cows ... 702 
Omens : Section VIII 
awigaad-The Intention of Horses... 703 
Omens: Section 1X 
giaaiztqa—The Attitude of Elephants 707 
Omens: Section X 
argafagia—On the cries of Crows... 710 


Omens: Section X]1 


wigaiaiq-Further Omens wee = 7 
qr@reata:—On the time of Fruition 
of Effects . 738 


aaaeagagq—On the Functions and 
Properties of the Asterisms ee 
faftresiguy-On the Functions and 
Properties of Tithis or Lunar 
Days wae «= «9.46 


CVII. 


xviit 


seny-On the Qualities of the 
Karanas 


aaastaeaq-On the Effects of Birth 


in the Asterisms 


Wrtaarareara:—Division of the Zo- 


diac into Signs 


fare qestvary:-(of Vindhyavasin) | 


Effects ef Planetary Combina- 
tion on Marriage. 


yemaeara:-On the Transits of 
Planets 


eqTeatara: On the Worship of the 


Stellar Deity 
sqagiateara:-Conclusion 


sleatyearit—Table of Contents in 


this Science 


wer eairet-Slokanukramanika ... 


yeaa rqrasenggia:—Sanskrit 
Index 
English Index 


Page 


7148 
753 


762 


764 


768 


794 
798 


800 
1-48 


49-68 


ERRATA. 


For. 
culturists. 
willbecome 
wasigia 
destrution 
Vaugas 
AEA ABA 
aAu 
GST: 

Iza 
Abhitaras 
areeraqica 
eyest o 
wisatar 
facazg iat 
Snperior 
Kamala 
ighting 
ATA 


‘last but one, o 


Page. Line. 
36 17 
33 20 
64 14 
38 6 
69 3 
80 19 
103 Mast 
104 £28 
133. 20 
165 20 
173 16 
185 10 
208 2 
8 
15 

214 2 
216 last 
224 7 
237 23 
283 14 
316 §=20 
354 26 
406 12 
407 top 


SeeG@nsegseeed 


theirh ead 
taqatar 
thel imbs 
TSTMIaat 


woe FAL TFATATS 


Read. 
culturists, 
will become 
TABIATTa 
destruction 
Vangas 
AVTAGSST 


Abhisaras 
HIBCTNSA 


eyes to 
AAT 
superior 
Tamala 
lighting 
aaa 

of 

During 
conch 
their head 
faqatat 
the limbs 
Verges 


446 
496 
305 
599 
310 
512 
582 


23 


Sloka 83 - 
eo 4 
ATANT ST 
arate: 
BwsaA TTT 
couch 
Sloka 16 


628 last but one awsassar 


629 


656 
677 
686 
665 
668 
725 
731 
748 


15 


27 


yellow) 


Sloka 31 

Adh. LXXXVI 
Sloka 62 

fare wer: 

ar 

qzaaia 

at aatt 

zie 


Slokas 83—-84 
gang 


, aitaanier 


. alae: 


Se 
eoen 


Sw CTT 


« conch 


Sloka 17 


. AUHASs ar 


. yellow), 
637 Transpose ‘vessel’ in the 3rd line as the first word in the 2n: 


646 line 23 For mangooses 


oeee 


eeoe 


Read mongooses. 
Sloka 37 
Adh, LXXXVII 


. Sloka 26 
. faigqer: 


© al 


qonaicd 


. Staaf 
, tiger 


uo sft werataT Taz: Ul 
(i qeeaeAT 
BRIHAT SAMHITA 


aie 


SITATATSATA Ut) Introductory. 


TAA Aras Walaiseaear aay TAA: | 
FIARACATITINZASMT ad: TAT Ul 


Sloka 1.—The Sun who’ is the procreator of the 
Universe, who is the supreme being (soul of the 
Universe), who is the natural ornament of the sky and 
who is adorned with rows of thousands of rays that 
resemble molten gold, is flourishing supreme. 


qyAgEMaRaaAISlaT WNIT | 
Masgageraanavada: eA TANTT UR 


Sloka 2.—Being convinced of the correctness and 
truth of the voluminous science expounded by Brahma 
(the first sage), I now begin to write this scientific work 
explaining clearly its ideas in a way which is neither 
too brief, nor too copious. 


gira afeadt ary a asta | 
Isisguigeaas Bt AAR 13 


Sloka 3.—Simply because this ancient work was 
composed by a sage, it should be good, while that written 
by an ordinary man of the present day could not be SO. 
When the sense conveyed in both the cases is the same, 
while the words used alone are different, why should 


2 qocagarary [Adh. I. Sl. 455 


there be any distinction between the two as it is a 
non-Vedic subject ? 


The translation of a Vedic passage into any language is not 
as sanctified as the original though the sense may be the same 
as the former lacks the “1*z (Sabda) or the sound of the original: 


araaaqaeaaaa a BaHia ale frames | 
gulzaataetata ar aise fara afesaga: en 


Sloka 4.—Iit has been declared by our grand father 
(Sage Brahma) that the day of the week belonging ¢o 
Mars—that is Tuesday—is not auspicious. People of our 
generation have also stated that the week day of Mars 
will not prove good (for beginning or doing any function). 
Wherein is the special merit in the two declarations 
of man and God? 


aati weaheat waa: | 
PAAMTRAAACAAATISa AAAS? UII 


Sloka 5.—Looking into the vastness of the science 
that has emanated from Brahma and others and its 
being epitomised gradually by successive sages, I also 
take pleasure in writing this work in a brief manner. 

This science viz., Astronomy-cum-Astrology was created 
by Brahman himself as ancillary to the Vedas. It was handed 
down from him to 17 (Garga) and other sages. 


Of. ai: 

vay tqatyar ae aged (eaeAAry | 

Vay Salas MaGe TATyaraea I 
Rat eaazye: ated Pearsresaraaa | 

AM yas wet Aereseaswsag | 


HAMA UT MCT WUITAN TSS | 
aera wgiirgat ae: G: SASTIEAT 11 Ha. 


Adh. I. Sl. 6-7] WTATS¥ATA: 3 
nr aetna entsasne anne stneene osname aan auensebememenemnaseneraeenemeaneemaniitel 


adtaa: Rae saat Iaasaaga | 
enqras wa agatha: UG 

Sloka 6.—Originally, there was only darkness 
pervading throughout the universe. Then came water. 
From it sprang a blazing golden egg consisting of the 
two parts of the shell, viz., the earth and the firmament. 
Out of this, it is said, arose Brahman, the creator, with 
the Sun and the Moon for his eyes. 

Cf. ag: 

MPT, aAraanTqarsawny | 

anatdaiaaa aqraitia ada: tt 

aa: aTVpinaasat sagas | 

ACFMATA MT: MSTaAAA Tg: 

disaraatitqaara: qeaissay: @araa: | 

aaqaadshtea: a oz caaggay 

aisfavara editreeantagy aaa: Ist: | 

aT we gaara arg ariaaraag i 

aenAass apaigaana | 

arg aX cad ger adera(tarag: 

aay ater gia stent ara & avqaas | 

at Vaeaqiaag Ys Aa Awan: Ga: 

awMaErnasag faq qzaqrnsa | 

AI: T Fas BS wae vredla u 

aawe a wnargrear qtacazz | 

CAAHARAA CaTATAAVSASUTZAT Nt 

anal @ weeratl g qa we ahaa t 

wea sary femareragt card | area vera. 


aie? TAME Tele RTE Rare | 
BS BATAS BATA AT? RA hol! 


4 seeaicarary [Adh. I. S1..8-9 


Sloka 7.—Sage Kapila has declared sara-Pradhana 
(the unmanifested Prakriti) to be the material cause of 
the universe, while Sage Kanada—who was the founder 
of the atomic theory relating to the origin of the 
Universe—has described the Dravyas—the nine sub- 
stances—as the material cause. Some have opined that 
time is the cause of the universe. There are others who 
say that the universe was produced and is sustained by 
the natural and necessary action of substances according 
to their inherent properties (and not by the agency of 
a supreme being). Lastly, there are people who state 
that the actions—good or bad—of the beings are the 
cause of the universe. 


AeTUaaAGAT TART Ia aSHAATT | 
SaiaMeatetat THEA Fossa WAT MIclt 
Sloka 8.—Enough of this incidental discourse on 
a polemical and vast subject, and which, if it were to 
be discussed, would swell to a very great length and 
be of no avail to us for the present. I am now 
going to treat in a decisive manner of the principles of 
the science of Astrology—Jyotissastra—and the ancillary 
topics: 
SU TEaaA HAA THETA 
AHA TTI ala gate: TSI Azar | 
rasa Waa a geataaeanaatacaat 
AMeMsHAaI HYIs Hea asTTNs 
Sloka 9.—The science of Astrology consists of 
various branches and is in three sections or Skandhas— 
vig., wa-Ganita, gttt-Hora and wrat-Sakha, and the 
treatment of the subject in its entirety is termed by sages 


Adh, I. S] 10.11] TAASCUTT: 5 


aitat-Samhita (compilation or collection). The first 
teeq or section where the exact movements, etc., of 
the planets in the several signs of the zodiac are ascer- 
tained through mathematical computation is otherwise 
known as a*a-Tantra. Horoscopy is another section ; 
agiaitaa-Angavinischaya or locating precisely the cor- 
rect position of the Lagna, etc., which is the first step in 
atasea-Jatakakarma is the 3rd. 

Ti: 

Tia Bas arat at af fragea: | 

facerug faiafee: ditarnima a: 0 

TRATHATANTATTATSIT BUT AAT: | 
aiid Rreavaa TeTAATAT: TE TAT 12 oll 

Sloka 10.—By me have been treated in detail in 
the seme (Karana Grantha) ‘valaaitsaer (Pancha 
Siddhanthika), of retrograde and direct motions of the 
several (non-luminous) planets from Mars onwards, their 
disappearance (eclipse) through proximity to the Sun, 
and their reappearance or emerging after conjunction 
with the Sun, their state of being at war or planetary 
fight. All things connected with horoscopy along with 
births, journeys, marriages. etc., have been already 


treated of in my previous works, 


This shows that Varahamihira had already written Brihat 
Jataka, Yatra, etc. 


TANITA BUNIMNY TATwaTy | 
CT ° sa 

AUST KM Fae YoTAAA: TH: TTT 112 2 

Sloka 11.—Omitting queries and their respective 
answers which are not highly useful for our purpose, 
and also the origin of the planets and other unessential 
discussions, I am going to treat of real facts—the quint- 
essence of everything that is useful. eae 


6 geeaitarany [Adh. IT. 1-3 


| atacavaaeara | 2 The Astrologer. 
2, AMA Aaa SaTSaqTAra: | 


We shall now comment upon the aphorisms relating 
to an astrologer :— 

R. at ataeaisiusra: Pagqaat Ralare: aa- 
WAAR AA qaledaansaeaaaeseATaUT- 
AMAIANATHATAAATSSIATAH TPA TEA 
qa: | ara: aierenergartat f& gor eet wated | 

2 The astrologer should be of noble descent, 
good-looking, modest in disposition, truthful, free from 
malice, impartial, with well-proportioned limbs all perfect 
and unimpaired, strong joints, undeformed, with fine 
hands, feet, nails, eyes, chin, teeth, ears. forehead, 
eye-brows and head, with handsome physique and 
a voice deep and sonorous. For, merits and demerits 
are generally the reflections of good and bad physical 
features.” 


* Cf. Kumara Sambhava-Canto V—36. 
ageaa Wait WeTAa a VIeAsaarly aa: | 
aw te & shogarqaa aqieaaracgreaat aaq I 
2, at yo: | Bate: aaedl aval sfaaraargy 
~~ C a 
aqntaag attra a giles: aaearacaqaata: 
~ lot AA ~ ~ 
sqaseaaal wiaantatraraataian agar - 
aaqnaraaata: aaaeanenearaa: wracacaT 
Saraara | geafradeaataeMsa Tae 
'3. The following are the good qualities of an’ 
astrologer. He must be clean and active, bold and = 


‘Adh, II. 4] fratdrssara: 7 


eloquent, have readiness of wit, fully conversant with 
the details of the { place and time and sincere in dispo- 
sition. He should not be timid in an assembly, should 
not be overpowered by his fellow students, must be well. 
trained, should understand the heart of others, should 
be free from vices, must be conversant with the art 
of propitiation, with hygiene, magic and ablutions, 
should be engaged in the worship of the Devas, 
should be an observer of fast and penance, should 
be endowed with great power resulting from the 
wonderful achievements of his scientific knowledge, 
should be capable of answering questions put by others, 
and voluntarily suggesting palliatives and remedies 
regarding things other than the visitations of God. 
He should also be thoroughly conversant with works 
dealing with calculations of the positions, etc., of planets, 
Samhita, Horoscopy and their several details. 


8. at mania 1 wifsatianaiigantameg 

inthe ba “ ¢ n 

qaaag Mardy qaalsadaargiaraaggaarel- 
UTMCAAAMUCHA RSA ATA J TAT | 


4. In that astronomical science, there are five 
schools, viz., Paulisa (belonging to Pulisa), Romaka (a 
Siddhanta, probably derived from the Romans), Vasishtha 
(belonging to Vasishta), Saura (belonging to Surya), 
Paitamaha (or Brahma Siddhanta), that is Siddhanta ‘by 
Brahmagupta. In these are treated of all about Yuga, 
year, Ayana, Ritu, Masa, Paksha (fortnight), Day, Night, 
Yama, Muhurtha, Nadee, Prana, Thruti and its further 
subdivisions of time, and the astrologer should be con- 
versant with all these and also with the ecliptic. 


8 gecaivararsy [Adh. II. 5-7 


er @ Alaa AA TATSATET TOAST 
ar @ RUT: | 


5. He should also be familiar with the four kinds 
of measurements of time, viz., att-solar ; ara, a duration 
(day) intervening between the first rising of any 
particular planet or star and its corresponding next 
rising ; ata stellar calculation in terms of lunar months, 
Fithis, etc., with the occurrence of Adhimasa or inter- 
calary lunations and intercalary days. 


A ait day is the interval between one sun-rise and the 
succeeding one. <A alaa or terrestrial day is the interval between 
two contiguous risings of the Sun at the Equator.” Thirty such 
days constitute a al4a month, alata is the time taken by the 
Moon to clear a Star. A atezalq consists of 30 lunar Tithis and is 
a period intervening between two successive conjunctions of the 
Moon with the Sun. An Adhika Masa is a period.of a lunar 
month occurring between two solar Sankramanas in the same 
Rasi. For this and 34a, see Suryasiddhanta. 


&, TMISTANTTIAN A eallatdiat AWaIraeselag | 


6. He should be familiar with the computation of 
the commencement and termination times of the 60 
year-period, the Yuga (8 year-period), a year, a month, 
a day, an hour and also of their respective lords. 

There are 12 Yugas or five-year periods in a cycle of 
60 years and their lords are stated as follows: 

fac: gical wehraameaetacaiterenaa | 

magia ha adausasreainrm: ser: i 


 (& aietat a arararmaegaeqaiaraacan- 
TEATS: | | | 


Adh. II. 8-10] fxdtaysvara: 9 


In the case of the several systems of measurements 
of time, viz,. Solar, Savana, Lunar, etc., he must be 
able to distinguish what are similar and what are not 
similar; and also be conversant with the aptness or 
otherwise of each for (being used for) any particular 
purpose. 


C, fageatescqaqiaaa TaIaaaPTssararain- 
wlcaiaanat smawraqenitqqaradg wadeagHaas | 


8 In cases of difference of opinion among the 
Siddhantas regarding the actual termination of an 
Ayana, he should be able to reconcile them by showing 
the agreement between accurate calculation and what 
has been actually observed in the circle drawn on the 
ground through shadow and water-appliances. 


Q. aaidiat a gent alarnecarearawalaanaaie- 
oT aT: | 
9. Heshould also be conversant with the causes 
that lead the planets from the Sun onwards to proceed 
in different kinds of motions—rapid, slow, southerly, 
northerly, towards apojee, perijee, etc. 
Vide =) Palipedebner = 48. 


t o, aaiaegnal AY HANA araHlale Baar eala- 


~ 


PaganisararaawTaMETAAATRIAaaeT 


10 Inthe matter of the Solarand Lunar eclipses, 
he should be able to predict by calculation the times 
of their commencement, cessation, direction, magnitude, 
duration, intensity and color as well as the Moon’s 
prospective conjunctions with the non-luminous planets 
and their warfare. 

a 


10 qeediearary [Adh. If. 11-13 


22. TURISAATTAARSTIAATA aT ATTTaAATI- 
IFAT: | 
11. He should in the case of every planet be 


able to calculate its distance (in Yojana) from the 
Earth, the length of its orbit, etc. 


22. YAMA ATA A TaTH SEAT ATSRIS- 
UIQTATSAASRATATGy ATHoHUTaAA: | 

12. He should be familiar with the Earth’s 
rotation (in its own axis) round the Sun and also 
with its revolution in the stellar firmament, its shape 
(aeart) and the like, the latitude (of a place) and its 
complement, the difference in the lengths of the day 
and night, the Chara Khandas of a place, the rising 
periods of the several signs at any place, the methods of 
conversion from shadow to time and time to shadow, 
to find the exact period—elapsed ghatikas since Sun-rise 
or Sun-set—at any required time from the position of 
the Sun or from the Lagna as the case may be, 

For Charakhandas, see Sripatipaddhati PP-157-160. 


23, MarmMasaacdigesanagaisant fraga-aqiat- 
ad . A a 
PUA: BABAMARAIAATISTA WA aH dTal 
wala | 


13. He is a true astrologer who is able to under- 
stand the objections and points of differences and meet 
them in clear and convincing language thus proving the 
truth of the science in its pristine purity in the same 
way as separating pure gold by bringing it under the 
touch-stone, fire, hammer, etc., and enabling it to retain 
its pure value. 


Adh. II. Sl. 1-4] fediqisvara: 11 


a maaeé waala aie aT WAAHAT Te: | 
fancta a a Rreaiza: @ Hy aera: 2H 
Sloka 1.—How could one who is not able to 

understand the ideas contained in the Sastras (in- 
correctly interprets the same), nor cares to answer any 
question that may be put to him, nor explains his views 
to his students, be termed an Astrologer that has grasped 
the essence of the science ? 


VEMSASHAYTY BOL WAI RATT | 
a fameganey wild ad aearaT URI 


Sloka 2—He is only a fool whose interpretation 
is quite opposed to the spirit of the text and whose 
calculations are also wrong. This is just like his 
approaching his grand father or God Brahman and 
praising before him his grand mother or Saraswati attri- 
buting the qualities of a courtezan to her. 


GY TUAA BA SraeTaqpAazea | 
alr @ Gee aagatedl gee 1131) 
Sloka 3.—When the astrologer has well.understood 
the mathematical portion, and has arrived at the correct 
Lagna by means of shadow, water-appliances, etc.» 


and has acquired a firm grasp of the science his predic- 
tions and — will never prove void of effect. 


wh qragaya— 

ATI FHI TAT KNA- 
qaNeaiawanITTa TW | 

A AA RoyenTaqTa 
TSHNATATANT Te NVI 


12 , Weearearary [Adh. II. 14 


The revered Vishnugupta says: 

Sloka 4.—It may be possible for a man trying to 
cross the ocean even to reach the other shore through 
the force of the wind. But itis not at all possible for 
a person who is not a sage to reach even mentally 
the other shore of the vast ocean of Kalapurusha, 4. e¢., 
Astrology. 


QB, gitarasta a ufseixenmattangiqaaar- 
Talia Tet aaHeqelacnwse- 
SCE CUBE PAC CIGCCU CURE CIC CCMMECCERCUCICS 
PATA TATA ALTAR ASA Ag AS HANIT AT A— 
sawMiszateaina aAalat Fatal Heras 
MC EOE TECTURE MEECICE CBR TDRICIC RIG! 
fanzidiat = aint Hwy | 


14. And the science of horoscopy comprises the 
following : the several divisions, viz., Rasi, Hora, Drek- 
kana, Navamsa, Dwadasamsa, Trimsamsa, the ascertain- 
ment of their strength or weakness, the calculation of the 
Balas of the planets due to fem, tata, #@, and ‘er in 
their various (Vargas) divisions, the humours of the 
planets, the constituent elements of the body represented 
by them, the substances pertaining to them, their castes, 
their characteristics, etc., the time of Nisheka (impreg- 
nation) and actual birth, extraordinary cases of birth 
and their prediction, the time of one’s immediate death, 
the years contributed bythe planets for one’s life, the 
Dasa and its sub-divisions, Ashtakavarga, Raja yogas, 
the Chandra or lunar yogas, conjunctions of two or 
more planets, Nabhasa and other yogas and their effects, 
the effects of planets due to their occupation of 


Adh. II. 15] feararsvaras 13 


a Rasi, Bhava, etc., and the effects of their aspects on 
them, one’s exit from the world, the region to which 
the deceased had belonged in his previous birth and 
the region to which he goes, the effects on queries— 
good or bad—at any time, yood or bad omens, the 
performance of marriage and other ritaals. 

All the above subjects are treated of in Brihat Jataka and 
Vivaha Patala—faateses. This latter work is not by Varaha- 
mihira but by one author called fi-eqai4, another great astro- 
loger, who has written on Muhurta for marriage and so on. | [See 
Adhyaya 103 infra] 


OL A_LAN 


@4, aalat ¢ auitaanenaargraaeqaiaeees- 
req GMAR TA AIS AT ANAM Alo esees alsa aT TIS 
VATU V NUN ATAHSARSIFAGe TATA TSH A- 
Aaa TTS Talat Weadigerararay- 
ah ATA: | 

15. And in the work atat too, the seers have declared 
all about Tithis, week days, Karanas, asterisms, Muhurta 
(48'), Lagna, Yoga, the throbbing of the body, dreams, 
baths for success in battle, sacrifices performed for the 
propitiation of planets, the worship of the Yakshas 
7 days prior to the day of starting on a journey, prognosis 
through the movement—clockwise or otherwise—of the 
flame of the Sacrificial fire, the correct understanding 
of the feelings of the elephants and horses through the 
movements of their limbs, military proclamations and 
tendencies, omens, etc., the suitability through the help 
of the planets of any of the six expedients in foreign 
politics, viz., (1) afe-peace or alliance (2) fame-war 
(3) art-march or expedition (4) e4@t or aea-halt (5) 
asta-seeking shelter and (6) ®a-duplicity; the four 


14 | geeafgarara [Adh. II. Sl. 5. 16-18 


means of success against an enemy. vtg., (1) @taa-conci- 
liation or negotiation (2) @a-bribery (3) 4%-sowing dis- 
sensions and (4) 4%%-punishment (open attack)—to be 
judged by the omens (good or bad) when setting out 
on a journey; nature of the camping ground—lands 
for the location of the army—, the colors of (ceremonial) 
‘fires, the procedure of employing at the proper time 
ministers, spies, envoys, foresters, instructions for besieg- 
ing and capture of fortresses belonging to others. 

aaa wRatanetaata adt trata T4 | 

TE TA aaNet Tea ens |i) 

Sloka 5.—He who has got a clear grasp of the 
astrological science inclusive of the mathematical portion 
as if it were spread before “his eyes in the world and 
engraved in his intellect and imbedded in his heart, the 
predictions made by him will never prove ineffective. 


0%, aiearaiag cataeaat aale | 
16. It is only he who has made a complete and 


thorough study of the Samhita that becomes fit to divine 
the past, present and future—a true Astrologer. 


gio. aad Aiearraians | 

17. The wundermentioned subjects are treated 
of in the Samhita, 

2¢, fantelat wat away a ast wHlalasia- 
TA TOTAN HTT A TATA AS FATA Tea AT BAT - 
ZaaITAANI: GOA, ARAMA Tacqnecr- 
a: | agian: | weawal aaaeqEMTT RATT aAe- 
AMAATCTIRSTASAMUSMA ATM aT? THT H- 


Adh. II. 18] igdtatseara: 15 


ASAAMAITNATNT TASH lta ST aA Te CATT — 
Sq TAMA TATA RSS ATT ETAT ATA ATT — 
PAM AAaAA AT THAT ARTIS MATH MAT SIT AAA: 
SYNAAN TA TAZA a MSA Aaa HeMAA eda 
CANON 
AUAARTTHEATS FISHBAU HH AAA AST SAMA 
ragefaeat fizmaaresT Tess a TAVS ATTA. 
SaNteagial asa wana was_aia 
fairana arareaia a amas wager aa a afaa- 
~ SN a io lan wT d ~~ 

aaqcanatiagaa cada Paeafiacara | a Aarsar 
qeaeaseaaraiad fara | aargydat aa 
Teast TWaeIa: KITA: | aasaent Wat a ea 
BAAS | AAT MAA Tea TET aTAeAT AAT 
aaa Aid | aangentactia aiaagsseaiia | Tar 
TRL TATA AIATATATA Karka waea | 

18. The movements of the Sun and other planets, 
their nature and extent of change if any, their magnitude, 
color, rays, brilliancy, their form or figure, their setting 
and rising, their route, the nature of their motion on 
the way, retrograde and direct, upwards and downwards, 
conjunction with a star or planet and of their course 
among the stars and the like, their effects, the nine triads 
of stars (divided like a tortoise) and their effects in the 
countries, the Agasthya Chara (the course of Canopus), 
the time of its rise (which ushers the Sarat Season when 
every thing on earth assumes a lively appearance), 
the course of the seven (sages aadfa, wih, nieta, TSR, 
S86, *q and @f&s) stars, the constellation called Ursa 
Major and their effects, the assignment of countries: 
substances and living beings to the planets and also to 


16 Weeaarary Adh. If. 18] 


the stars, the ascertainment of the good effects resulting 
from’ planets occupying all the three houses, viz, 
Ist, 5th and 9th, effect of planets being at war, 
their conjunction with the Moon, the planet presiding 
over the year and the effect caused thereby, monsoonish 
indications of the weather, the Moon’s conjunction with 
the stars, Rohini, Swati, Purvashadha and Uttarashadha, 
symptoms for immediate rain, predicting good or bad 
effects through the growth of flowers and fruits, 
the misty halo round the Sun and the Moon, line of 
clouds crossing the Sun at Sunrise or Sunset, of the 
winds, fall of meteors, apparent outbreak of fire in the 
quarters, earthquakes, redness of the sky just before 
Sunrise or after Sunset, clouds taking the appearance 
of a City, of dust-storms, portent of thunderbolts, vari- 
ation in value of commodities, the growing of corn, 
fruits, etc., Indradhwaja or banner worshipped by kings, 
rainbow, architecture, the science of foretelling good 
or evil by the movements of limbs, or by the 
cawing of crows, Antarachakra omens, phenomena 
connected with the deer, dogs, winds blowing in 
the 8 directions, royal mansions, construction of temples, 
casting of images, installation or consecration of an idol, 
herbalistic treatment, finding of sources of water, 
ceremony of general purification by water (done by 
kings, etc.), flight of the Khanjana (wagtail), expiation 
of evil caused by unusual phenomena boding calamity, 
Mayura Chitraka ya®%@s or gsatara (coronation cere- 
mony when the Moon is in 94), of swords, tiara or 
diadem, all about the features, etc. of HRAG-a cock, 
tortoise, cow, rain, horse, elephant, a man and a 
woman, about the harem, breaking out of boils, injuries 
to shoes and clothes, on chowries, staffs, beds and 


Adh. II.]J Fretaisvara: 17 


seats, examination of gems and precious stones, lamps, 
materials derived from tusks, wood, etc., good and bad 
omens which are common to all the people of the world 
inclusive of the King and the ordinary individual. And 
all the above should be divined by an astrologer every 
moment with a single-minded devotion. And it is not 
possible for a single person to comprehend all these 
occurring day and night. Hence an astrologer in the 
employ of a king should engage four efficient assistants 
for the task, each to be in charge of two directions, thus: 
one to observe east, and south-east, a second for the 
south and south-west, a third for the west and north-west, 
and the fourth for the north and north-east. By this, it 
will be possible for noting clearly the fall of meteors and 
the like which is sudden in its nature and one’s good and 
bad effects have to be predicted through the form, color, 
viscidity, size, etc., of these falling bodies and as to how 
they dash or strike against the other planets and stars. 

ugien (Sringataka) yoga. If ata birth all the three houses 
ViZey lst, 5th and 9th are occupied by planets, Sringataka yoga 
is formed: The yoga and its effect are thus described by Varaha- 
mihira in his Brihatjataka : 

NMS TANTHASHAY:” also “aMEs Farge” 

Cf. also aizraat 


STAINS SS OY AAS ASN aan 
hansganaeagiad {wa: Har: qwaeqar: | 
MAT FRIAS TINT: sPSSAWAT AAS: Wi 

Also qarerz 


qarqranintey: ay ouGeesy | 
AMS TNEAAFUST: eANgory: gieagal wat a 
a 3 | 


18 qeeatearary [Adh. II. Sk 6-10 


SAMRMTRSIS STAR | 
PCP CRIC ME IOECORSIRMILAL 
Sloka 6.—A king who does not patronise an 
astrologer who is thoroughly proficient in the science 
with all minute detailsand who is an expert in Astronomy 
and Horoscopy will surely come to grief. 
qa aaa Ushi Tawar Preaftaran: | 
at a oivesica safest afraieq io 
Sloka 7.—Even sages who have selected forests 
as their dwelling place, who are free from pride or 
arrogance and who are without family ties begin to take 
interest in the science, when they meet an astrological 
expert. 
ATAU TAL WATT TAT Tar | 
AMSAT UAT AAAET FUCA UNC 
Sloka 8.—Just as the night does not shine without 
a lamp, and the sky without the Sun, so will a king have 
pitfalls like a blind person, if he has no astrologer to 
guide him. 
PEC RIDE CE CREE TROBE DL 
aaATIESIA a Geatacad ale ie 
Sloka 9.—A Muhurta, a Tithi, a Star,a Ritu, an 
Ayana, all these will be a confusion to aking, if there be 
no astrologer to guide him. 
qMAaaaeaea rary atacatisaat: | 
a4 aa: faa ator aay Tala gol! 
Sloka 10. - Therefore should a king who is desirous 
of suécess, fame, wealth, all kinds of enjoyments and 


‘Adh, IT. Sl. 11-14] figdtdrssara: 19 


happiness secure the services of a leading astrologer who 
is well-read, clever and proficient in the science. 


alata Sa aed yialassar | 
agyat & aay wt ax a as vee 
Stoka 11.—One desirous of prosperity should there- 
fore avoid residing ina place where there is no astrologer. 


For, the astroloyer is, as it were, an eye, and no sin will 
creep in there. 


qT atacargist a aTHTTTIaA | 
TaBrEMAgt A wad CaryeaTH: UN 
Sloka 12.-No person who studies astrology and 
divines the course of destiny will ever be seen in hell. He 
will have his permanent residence in the Brahmaloka. 
¢ . ~ NA 
WeYTAATAATH A AAT at sit | 
AIFS A VAS Ta WSs: 23 
Sloka 13.—That Brahmin who has studied and 
understood completely the Samhita with the commentary 


is fitto be honoured with the role of chief guest in a 
Sraddha and the dinner is sanctified by his company. 


wooat Ee aqTaay aras yaad faq | 
mrs Tsaed fH gaeaTaT Ue 


Sloka 14.—The Yavanas are of low origin. When 
this science has come to stay with them and when such 
astrologers are worshipped as sages, how much more 
should an astrologer of the Brahmin origin be ? 


Cf. 
axraaegra wate qd: arex eat azanrara Taz | 
faotaiiea agiigeat grata acaareare 0 


BO qeaigararg fAdh. II. 15.19 


WTAE VTS quot wags az | 
THAUTIARTZRAN REIaA Waa aw uy gra 


= ON A 


HSCHIATeTHTsaaeaqa: | 
SUM A AIT AeA 7 gy Taaq U24M 
Sloka 15.—Prediction made by people who are 
sorcerers, who are possessed by deities and who Jearn 
something about the subject in question by eaves-drop- 
ping and by hearsay should on no account be con- 
sidered, tor they are no astrologers. 


aaa a: ae sage aed | 
T USTIR WT HA AAAA ATH 2K 
Sluka 16.~He who poses himself as an astrojoger 
by his knowledge of merely Jocating the stars, without 
having actually studied and understood the science is 
reckoned as a sinner and a blot to the society. 
ANNA Acaigqaiaay | 
RIMS a: Ae a faery 121 
Sloka 17.—Just as a prayer addressed to the clod of 
earth at the gate of a city fora boon is fulfilled through 
blind chance, even so is considered the prophecy made by 
the ignorant which sometimes comes out true. 
APTA TAA EMSAR ATT: | 
UG Maaeayad WisaMeeqeigar ec 
Sloka 18.—A king ought to shun a Jyautishika who 
justifies the occurrence of an event as a result of his 
original prediction, who has become arrogant by dabbling 
in astrology and who introduces irrelevant matters. 


qe Aranastaa eiaradiears | 


AVIST? F AEC Visca TAIT UV 


Adh. II. 20-22] fedrarscaras 21 


~ 


Stoka 19.—He who is well-versed in Horoscopy, 
Astronomy and Samhita should be honoured by the 
sovereign and kept near him with a view to secure pros- 
perity. 

aq aaa Bat asat a Tay | 
Bila TaRMSM TR Ca TH UNRoll 

Sloka 20.—Neither a thousand elephants, nor ever 

four times that riumber of horses will be able to accom- 


plish what a single Jyautishika who knows the time and 
clime can do. 


TANT AT MAT HAA BAT | 
fay vated ara ala: weal WaAaTAT 122M 
Sloka 21.—The effect of all bad dreams, bad 
thoughts, bad sights and wicked actions will vanish away 
immediately, when one hears about the Moon’s passage 
over the stars. 
TAT AB | 
seat fat angarat a orifa walsantfe areaq | 
anand gata gaara Haat a sre u ga. 
a aaeaia word: frat Taal at ATatsvat Ted | 
aaqisMares sa aay: eae Salaq NRE 
Sloka 22.—No one, may it be the father, mother, a 
relative or a friend, will so well be solicitous for the wel- 
fare of the king and his retinue as a trust-worthy astro- 
loger employed in his court, seeking merely unsullied 
fame. 


Thus ends the Second Adhyaya on the Aphorisms 
about the Astrologer. 


Pe vectnceteiolasennpie ee ae ee 


ogETa: 21! The Sun. 

MIUgeITgIad Wage | 
id an %_ 6 y x 

Ta BUAWMAaA mH TATA U2 

Sloka 1.—The Sun’s southern course began at one 
time {rom the latter half of Aslesha and the northern, 
from the beginning of Dhanishta. This must indeed have 
‘been the case as it is so recorded in our ancient Sastras. 

AETAAA Aa: HLH AANTaMTEIq | 

A A ~ “ cs 
THAT Alias Terrassa: UA 
AMEN eAsAAIAT Tt AeaiAT | 
lo la y ~ 

SMIMITAIMNAR ASS Agia | 3 
) Slokas 2-8.—At present, one course of the Sun begins 
from the commencement of Karkataka and the other from 
the beginning of Makara. That it is different from what 
has been stated above can easily be ascertained by direct 
observation. 

By marking every day the position of an object situ- 
ated at a distance at the time of the rising or setting of 
the Sun, or watching the entry and exit of the brim of 
the shadow of a stick placed at the centre of a big circle 
drawn on the Earth, the difference in the Sun’s course 
may be detected. 

aey TEE Alara ea are ateay | 
¢ , AR 
PREBMATMA aTIa ad AeA NVI 

Sloka 4.—When the Sun retraces his steps before he 
has reached Makara and changes his direction, he destroys 
the West and the South. When he similarly changes his 
course without reaching Karkataka, he brings evil to the 
North and the East. 


Adh, III. Sl. 5-7] aatatseara: er) 


Of. mi: 

war faaaasarg were Aa | 

srssat sanisarretar laeaqreaee san sia 
UAT: 

Quoe Aeoragsayy TIT | 

qianarsat a aervara — gia tt 


TAUAAAAAUA SMTA: Taaasigar: | 
spraaaad Agamaraageig: Ml 
Sloka 5.—When the Sun changes his course after 
staying a little longer in his northern course, there will be 
prosperity all over and increase of crops. The same result 
will accrue when he is in his natural course. But if there 
should be any change or alteration in his gait, he will 
cause fear to the whole mankind. 


wald is interpreted by Bhattotpala as agreement between cal- 
culation and actual observation in the Sun’s change of course. 


aaneh Ta at Aer TARAS FOI | 
a faeia aa yu sais TENA 1.4 
Sloka 6.—On days other than Parva (=the 8th, 14th 
ef each half lunar month and the days of the full and 
New Moon), the planet @gi—Thwashta trims off a part of 
the Sun’s brightness and darkens his‘disc. Then seven 
kings along with their subjects willmeet with their end 
through weapons, fire and famine. 
Of. Tere 
AY Warsral Sr ATT ARTA: | 
wget aagara: adereroat i 


WAT SRAM Uae: Hateaherag | 
Ta REY THUS TS TAMA IN 


24 geeitera = [Adh. III. SI. 8-11 


Sloka 7. —There are 33 Ketus, the sons of Rahu, and 
are named Thamasa Keelakas. When they appear in the 
Sun’s disc, their effects should be predicted according to 
their colour, position and form. 


YT WBNSSMA: WAKA TAVES FIFA: | 
CUPRA TTEUNSA AIT TASS Uc 
Sloka 8.—And these Thamasakeelakas when they 

enter the Sun’s disc produce malefic effects. The effects 
will be auspicious when they enter the Moon’s orb. When 
they assume the forms of a crow, a truncated body, a 
sword, etc., they produce inauspicious effects ‘even in the 
Moon’s disc. Much worse will be the effect they produce 
when they are in the Sun’s disc. 

TUGTA SAAT HET Tilad aia | 

ATACAATAC, ATR AST 1811 

Har aTeATa Star TAT AE eras | 

ApaAaReTTa AT HAT ATA: |e oil 

Slokas 9-10.—When they become visible, the follow- 

ing indications appear: the water will become muddy 
and foul; the sky will be filled with dust; there will 
arise storms carrying sand with them and crushing tops of 
mountains and trees; the trees and creepers will reveal 
effects contrary to the seasons; the animals and birds 
will become heated by the Sun; there will be false fires 
in all the directions ; there will be thunderbolts, earth- 
quakes and such unusual phenomena boding calamity. 


a7 Tae Sona dat fhaaiongcaats ae | 
aera Reaelat Bo TAZ 18 
Sloka 11.—The effects described above, viz., water 
becoming turbid, etc. arenot to be attributed to the 


Adh. III. Sl. 12-16]  gafarseara: 25 


appearance of the Thamasa Keelakas at the time of the 
eclipse of the Sun or the Moon. The effects due to the 
appearance of the Thamasa Keelakas, etc. should be dec- 
lared only when they become visible at other times and 
not otherwise. 


afaq aftiq Xa caaaanta @aAraeat: | 

aaa saad aeicaiat aftsaq 2 

FASATAU Fatscyrgeqaaairar: | 

AAT: HSTINeT WATT 123i 

TATASTAT: AAI VTATHSAagets | 

Teas AHA: AHRIAMIVZET: 112 vil 

Qa STAM: Bspwawawitisa Aas | 

BIVIARG BA A GUHA wwIesaeT 124 

aay MoT aga a MTT: | 

anal aied aged SreBaaad way 128 I 

Slokas 12-16.—Wherever these Thamasa Keelakas 

show themselves in the Sun’s disc, there will be distress 
and misery to the kings ruling over these countries. And 
even sages, emaciated being stricken with hunger, for- 
saking their usual religious duties and-good conduct will be 
emigrating with great difficulty to other countries, having 


in their arms infants—mere skeletons—without flesh due 
to want of food. Good men will be robbed of their entire 
wealth by thieves and will be heaving long sighs ; and 
their eye-lids will be drooping and bodies, languid ; and 
their eyes will be obstructed by tears due to sorrow. 
Feeling weak and disgusted on account of trouble caused 
not only by their own Government but also by other 
(bordering) kings, people will begin to speak in disdain 
ua 4 | 


26 geeit@arara =" [Adh, III. Sl. 17-19 


-about the behaviour of their own kings and will not 
attribute their suffering to their previous Karma. Clouds 
though thick with full quantity of water will not let loose 
the same to fall on the earth. Rivers will become atten- 
uated and crops will be found only here and there (only 
in a few places). 


Now the author speaks of the effect of the several shapes 
of these portents. 


0d AUGASNAs BeHarqdeayta | 
= ° e on iy 
SNE FAH Trad BloRSHTY 11201! 

Sloka 17.—If there should appear in the Sun’s disc 
Thamasakeelaka in the form of a stick, it portends the 
death of the sovereign ; if the object appear like a body 
without the head (headless), there will be outbreak of 
diseases ; if the form be that of a crow, there will be 
danger from thieves, and if the form be that of a Keelaka 
(wedge), there will be famine. 


IRIKCAU LS ECE CECE ICU CIE OE 
ia 


WaArIAIgTH: CHioyyaneiasiaar Uc 
Sloka 18.—If the Sun’s disc be obscured by 
obstacles in the form of a king’s paraphernalia such as 
umbrella, chowrie, banner, etc., it indicates a change of a 
sovereign. If the Sun be hidden by sparks of fire, smoke, 
etc., it forebodes the destruction of people. 


wat gaat NaN RA ATTAAATT | 
fraradlaaaagisaisagre: 123i 


Sloka 19.—If there should be one single object in 
the Sun’s disc, it denotes the advent of famine. If 
there be two or more, it indicates the destruction of the 
sovereign. And should the objects referred to above be 


Adh. III. SI. 20-24] qatarseara: 27° 


of the colours, white, red, yellow and black, the destruc- 
tion of the following classes in their order, viz., Brahmins, 
Kshatriyas, Vaisyas and Sudras is indicated. 


eayqed F Fae TalaeTeieqal Veteara: | 
AMSA Bat Ita TF ATA URoll 
Sloka 20.—And these portents appearing on the 
Sun’s disc bring danger from these directions to the 
people that behold them. People will get troubles from 


that very quarter in which these portents make their 
appearance on the Sun’s disc. 


SAR Rare warns array | 

Gal avexga Vaca gales afea ueVi 

Palsaantt qa wacaige ateqery | 

AATIEMATGAS Ass Ay Waals Ul 

Slokas 21-22.—If the Sun be with upward rays of 

copper (red) colour, it denotes the ruin of the commander. 
If the colour be yellow, it betokens the destruction of the 
king’s son ; if it be white, the preceptor will die. If the 
colour of the Sun’s upward rays be variegated or misty 
and if there should be no immediate rain following, it 


causes chaos and disaster to the country through thieves, 
clash of weapons, etc. 


Now he speaks of the Sun’s colour in the different seasons : 
TR Baar TE: HA etegases at | 
MUSKET FY TTT VET. 


TUS BASlNtrgl SAA VITA AA Aes | 
Manis Ravq: qaraaaists Baarat uw 


28 qedfrarara = [Adh. III. SI. 25 


Slokas 23-24.—During the Sisira Ritu, the colour of 
the Sun will be like that of copper or tawny; it will be 
of greenish yellow or saffron colour in the Vasantha Ritu. 
In Greeshma Ritu, it will be almost pale or golden. In 
the Varsha Ritu, it will ‘be whitish; in Sarad Ritu, the 
colour will be that of the interior of the lotus ; and in the 
Hemanta Ritu, it will be blood-red, and the effect on 
mankind will be all auspicious. In the rainy season the 
Sun being glossy or showing the colours of other seasons 
@ sO is auspicious. 

Cf. aaraarat 


AHYTSAEY OSA ST TTT Bw: araar | 
fatawiey wg Rag wale adgqaiaa: feara: 0 
Also aan: 


fafa arsaara: stray afte aresz: | 
qara SEANTT gitar ay AAT u 
seh SARATY GIST TTT | 

sia: sete TUTal Fata Biya: 
CAMS AaMWaWiaAdiseaat | 


Sa: aa fasaq tara: ata rargaia | 
“ & ~ 
Gidl Tear HOMTAsIT aH Rava Neil 


Sloka 25.—If during the Varsha Ritu, the rays of 
the Sun be sharp and whitish in colour, the destruction of 
the Brahmins is indicated; when the colour is blood-red, 
the Kshatriyas will be ruined; if the colour be yellow, it 
indicates evil to the Vaisyas; and lastly, if it be black, the 
ruin of the last class should be expected. But if the rays 
be soft in the cases above mentioned, everything will 
prove auspicious. 


Adh. III. Sl. 26-29] gatarseaqra: 29 


Hey TH AGN: Kraay | 
dard Vidisn: BAA + eT Tera aT UREN 


Sloka 26.—If the Sun in Grishma Ritu be blood-red 
in colour, it causes fear in the minds of the people ; if 
during Varsha Ritu the Sun be dark, there will be drought 
in the country. In the Hemanta Ritu, if the Sun be 
yellowish, diseases will spring up very soon. 


qraresizargagtaavag: aaa: | 
MIMS AM Bia aTTayey ill 
aqainies ae ata ae: Artageaa: | 
aaa: aes a Hila sreasans lel 


Slokas 27-28—If the solar disc be cut across by a 
rainbow, it indicates something untoward to the ruling 
chief of the country. During the rainy season, if the Sun 
has a bright appearance, it indicates immediate rain. If 
during the Varsha Ritu the Sun be of the colour of the 
Sirisha flower, there will be immediate downpour of rain. 
If the colour be of the peacock’s plume, there will be no 
rain for 12 years to come. 

TU ATTA: | 


aqcaltzaerat ar aaqr Taxa Wes: | 
Gi | aa av aa qa: wasfa 


TUNIS Berd yulaay wagater wan | 
qa aageaa ara: edge 12 


Sloka 29.—When the Sun is dark in colour, ‘there 
will be danger to crops from insects and reptiles. If the 
colqur be ashy, there will be fear to be apprehended from 
other kings. If the Sun should havea slit in his disc, it 


80 3 geeainararg = [Adh. III. SI. 30.33 


indicates the destruction of the king who has the star 
occupied by the Sun at the time as his natal asterism. 
TAMIA Aral THAGA ATled THAT: | 
aacat sataa: eet seat Wat was elt 
Sloka 80.—If the Sun, while in the upper regions of 
the sky be red in colour similar to the blood of the hare, 
there will be war in the land. If he should appear cool 
like the Moon without rays, the king will be killed and 
another will soon occupy his place. 
AUT SW: | 
MASaan wy Tal Wala WEBI: | 
aq vafta axrar ae Braisesrar: We gia- 
MANHSAAA: WY TART AATawae: | 
ae: gat safaal Taaqrars ALI 
Sloka 31.—If the Sun should appear like a pot, 
people would suffer hunger and death. If he should ap- 
pear broken, people will die. If he should be without 
rays, it indicates fear ; if he assumes the form of an arch, 
the chief city will be ruined; if he appears like an 
umbrella, it indicates the destruction of the whole country. 


ATI aa GEN HHL ATA FY Sa FI 
SU Tar aiaaie ae vied aal JT ahaa: Azle 
_ Sloka 82.—When the Sun appears in the form of a 
flag-staff or a bow, there will be war; the same will be 
the case when he is quivering or of sharp rays. If there 
should be any black streak in his disc, the king ruling at 
the time will be killed by his own minister. 
In the 4th 1%, JY afaa4 is another reading. 
ss Reaargeaditaagesrnaaa act ga: | 
co MUTA MAT ATAAART A AAI - 


‘Adh. ITT. SI. 34-36] «© qdtatsvara: 31 


Sloka 83.—During Sunrise (or Sunset) when a 
meteor, lightning or a thunderbolt strikes the Sun, it 
indicates the death of the ruling king and the installation 
of a foreigner on the throne. 

ABT ST WTR: 

TATAAT VFS EeaLa_Aar | 

ASTSleaA AT UWA AT Wey arvaag y 


aralgaaatenteem: qeagt weaaigaan | 
Ths THR YI HiaEAT 13 
Sloka 34,—If the Sun should be encircled by Pari- 
vesha every day or during the two twilights or be red in 
colour during the times of setting and rising, it indicates a 
change in the sovereign. 


TEUMTTAIGe? TAG AESITTATT opera | 
ATA UATATHTAATTSAT AIT (AL 
Sloka 85,—If during Sunrise or Sunset the Sun be 
concealed by clouds in ,the form of weapons, it indicates 
that fighting is imminent. If the clouds in question take 
the form of a deer, a buffalo, a bird, an ass, a camel and 
the like, there will be fear infused among the people. 


eaRTHUTAITITAATTA Gaal Merz | 
Wt ¢ WERQS wrBita TarTaaag ze 
Sloka 86,—When an asterism on account of its con- 

junction with the Sun is subjected to a good deal of 
torture by the Sun’s rays, it emerges out all the more 
pure and clean as gold after its purification through fire. 
aa A Gere: 
WIE wat ataqaiaamay | 
faeinaaie aeard gariata ergata i 


32 qeeifkararg = [Adh. III. Sl. 37-39 


aa FATT: 
autre swsatsa WE acaemgiea: | 
amearragaaa aly acad u gfe. 


aasa afralt aeaqeratany fadisireag | 
saaey: afeana Tat ermal Tag 29 


Sloka 87,—If the mock-Sun (halo) be to the north of 
the Sun, there will be rain ; if to the south, there will be 
danger from floods; if above, there will be danger to the 
king ; if below (i. e-, towards the horizon), then the 
people will perish. 


sti Ramat a AUT 
qERasenigaagae a Rag | 
MANU SITET TAT THT: 
amas HaAga NR | 


Sloka 38.—If the Sun be of blood-colour when in the 
mid-sky, it portends the destruction of the king at no 
distant date. The same effect will be the case if the Sun 
should appear red by a dry idust-storm. If his colour be 
dark, variegated, blue or soiled, and if birds and beasts 
howl dreadfully at the times of Sunset or Sunrise, the 
death of many people will be the result. 


In the 4th w= wzzedar is another reading for wedat 
AABARABATS? WeATHTASATIT NAN | 
HapragMagas ats Hila Ba Rares Sn 

Sloka 89.——A Sun with a spotless form, clear and 

not crooked, with bright, abundant, clear and long rays 


and bearing a natural appearance, colour and features will] 
prove auspicious to the whole mankind. 


Adh. IV. SI. 1-2] wgeiiseara: 33 


GATS Tea: 

wa: Artagerra: Tara Sera: | 

agagaacern Gane frase: 

GUM: WACKER SATI: TaTary | 

waa: aaacarat Granrargirerg: ti 
Thus ends the Third Adhyaya on the ‘Course of the Sun.’ 


WAT ety The Moon. 
UATITaaaia: a ATAST | 
SUH TIATAT FFAATSSTT A 12 Ut 
Sloka 1.—The Moon being always below (or nearet 
to the Earth than the Sun) has half her orb illuminated 
by the rays of the Sun and white, while the other half 
is dark or black being obscured by her own shadow just 
as one half of a pot exposed to the Sun. 
Ut a HaaArea 
wage aang Heoragd aussaqere | 
SVT ATTA ATATTAT AFRET Ul 
aM | qa feared 
agama iere fred wraad wa: | 
ae umefieaea a fratd eoea o 


aeand sie wit Weoaeaa Haq | 


grata caurertiieat 4 aleqveateas ut 
Sloka 2.— The rays of the Sun falling on and being 
reflected by the watery Moon dispels the darkness of the 
night (on Earth) just in the same way as light reflected 
from a mirror (placed in the Sun) removes the darkness 
within a room. 
wa. 6 


34 gaeaieatary = [Adh. IV. SI. 3-6 


war u adie’ 
jaar Mes: Tal aeaieqegitrsst: | 
sararat fe cqaza qautaleaitar: wv 
SM Wssawe: 
agar tirerenit arcaracar fats t 
wale aa are qaiagaih grad g 
MAASHAS UMA PNIeeTY Tq Bacay | 
RARDIN: WATVASTUMTTTAs UR 
Stoka 3.—As the Moon leaves the surface of the Sun 
her back gets illumined by the Sun. So also the Moon’s 
disc begins to shine from the bottom (in an increasing 
measure), 
amt @ qafagrd 
faxed qu ata ga:cumeqat ta: | 
GM AMSA WZeawan waa wa: ui 


MaTAATHRATATAAIT Breeraeay: | 


AAG AMANSTUZ TATA Tal lv 
Sloka 4.—The brightness of the Moon is thus on the 
increase every day corresponding to her distance from the 
Sun, in the same way as the western side of a pot becomes 
gradually illumined by the Sun in the afternoon, 
VA WIM YSNMID WATe: | 
aeaq dtaasataaaa WeTIeT U4 
Sloka 5.—When the Moon passes through the south 
of Jyeshta, Moola and the two Ashadhas, there will be 


destruction of seeds, water-animals, ruin of forests and 
risks from fire. Vide infra Adh. XVIII—1 


ITT Ta: WI Ravaraaaay: TWIT | 
ataa a nae: fazaaaraaeats 118i! 


Adh. IV. S17] ° ‘waufscara: 35 


Sloka 6.—If the Moon goes through the south of 
Visakha and Anuradha, she will prove malefic. If she 
should pass even through the middle of Magha or of 
Visakha, she will bring on prosperity. 

aur a qaradigarany 

aafa farerarat wot areata area: 1 

safie: adeat Mstefsaradtarea: i - ga. 


qeatrana Teg Rear ETAT | 
Sagat aTAyE tarda ZsIed Iott 
Sloka 7.—The six stars reckoned from Revati con- 
join with the Moon when she has not actually come 
to them. The twelve asterisms counted from Ardra 
conjoin with the Moon only when she comes to their 
middle portion, while the remaining nine reckoned from 
Jyeshta conjoin with the Moon only after they have been 
completely passed by her. 
AAS WT: 


sara aursshed fearear aa aia | 
aafy sexagaiitta agiataricr | 
RATATH ASIANA AA sTAT A: | 
aiaarsqra qe at a Aonaq tt 
afigimeqea aaa: Teta: | 
gait qaga aadihia avqataritt | 
UAV AACA ATSAAA: | 
gars es caries ecererarter | 

AU FT MANA Tea 
Satlteafanramprerisaazata | 
WE TESA SIA TolreareT A ATR TT: 
WAU wrest KT ATSeT: I 
qed aera eed weaqerara w 


res er re ae 


36 gesigatarg. - [Aidh. IV. SI. 8-19 


ATR AAA AN AvaTAasysr weet: t 
aeqgesyn walaiseaeaeeaar: 
wuselerar: Bar WiitsiMiaa:— Fa 


The author now describes certain unusual appearances of 
the Moon- 
THAIMSE Aaa Aarsat Weal | 
atredte aeeaate fit aaatee licil 


Sloka 8.—When the horns of the Moon appear a bit 
raised and far from each other while presenting the ap- 
pearance of a boat, there will be trouble to the sailors, 
but prosperity to the mankind at large. 


Alaa I oieaata Ver agasifat aay | 
fizz fiatit agacdtat grag a vei 
Sloka 9.—If£ the northern horn of the Moon be 
higher than the southern by a half thus presenting the 
appearance of a plough, there will be trouble to the agri- 
culturists. there will be cordiality without any apparent 
cause among the kings and there will be prosperity in 
the land. 
AMA FSM: | 
qar ata: aaare arent AEAGIAT | 
eaiineaeyyl at wget @ aaEe: Nl 
aa qiramiid aayay Pfstra 
wat = faa gargerd qieneae - get 


afamiamagiad Fz CESIRSIST Tq | 
GSA AUATAPTATRE TSA F {Roll 
Sloka 10.—If the southern horn be raised by half, it 
is termed Dushtalangala—inauspicious plough—and will 
cause the demise of the Pandya king and the army will 
be mobilised for war. | 


Adh. IV. 11-12] aqulstaras 37 


AA A ZENA: | 
qtr a wage eld Raa TT t 
TSB FSAT aL TWaAraswse Caaq Wl 
area afragraea: aaqizaaaean: ea 
queqeied Wel wat eratazvVNtsaz NLM 
Sloka 11.—When the two horns are of even height, 
there will be good crops, happiness all over and timely 
rains. These effects for the whole period will be similar 
to that of the first day of the lunar month. If the horns 
assume the shape of a stick. disease will break out among 
cattle and the kings will be ruthless in meting out punish- 
ment. 
GUT A TVMT: | 


VIN TET ce: aait aagiragea | 
sageaea at araay ada aar ut 
MATa Agr Sleagsat gee ga fear | 
sqaqmiaeaar quseaat agezd tt 
sqaqeer wart fara qaeaa: t 
vat fret iaaralareeseata aar areft u 


ABSA ZENA TA T Sal Ta TAA | 
Aa *aaia Beas YRHETT eM 


Sloka 12,—If the configuration be of the form of a 
bow, there will be war and success will attend those that 
live in the direction indicated by the bowstring. If the 
Moon should appear stretched like the yoke of a carriage 
from south to north, there will be i a 


AUT FT FANT: 
Baa 8 Vel ata qetzateaieed | 
! WIKIA ast va uv 


88 qeeaivarary [Adh. IV, 13-15 


efian: aisaty aa anita aut av 
waa Hacaet Teast Wests: 
SPAT AAI sae afactracaraar | 
grad sfavta adinestawar tt 
Qeatatn waeaa alreraa aaa | 


TWAT Wee Miaras T TTA | 
fateta ata wea faire gag 1.231 
Sloka 13.—If the southern curved end of the yoke 
bea bit higher than that of the northern, the Moon is 
then said to be wwara? ‘slightly reclining on the side’ 
and will cause the destruction of the trading class and 
there will also be drought. 


aw @ Tani: 
qrasionva: fehrarers aEt seit | 
qabuardifa asisa arign genes: 0 
TAPING ae aiaisaeged weaeY | 


MAANAAQ ATA TATA 12 vt 
Sloka 14.—If one of the horns (of the Moon) 
should on account of the elevation of the other appear 
ina downward direction, the figure (or form) is termed 
wrafa —bent down or pulled down—and indicates 
famine all over affecting even the cattle. 
Of. qeat: 
rare war ore alaal CHa Aare | 
aeanamatras vin geraray tt 
ACSA Tal ANeAa AVS F Hrsreay | 


’ afarqueteaat saan acqatany 124 
Sloka 15.—\f the horns of the Moon should 
together appear like a circle it is termed ‘ Kunda’ and 


Adh. IV, SI. 16-19] MUISearay: 39 
ne eerie 


the ruling chiefs living in the land will be ousted from 
their places. | 
Cf. gan: 
wftowr aoes tar ultra FeIa TT | 
Peet aa dent qaneqasy ti 
Also varaariteer V-1-10. 
THANAAA SAGA TERE | 
alangyaeal gaara fale: ue ail 
Sloka 16.—If the Moon has her northern horn 
slightly raised and be of a form or configuration other 
than any of those described above, it indicates increase 
of happiness to mankind and advent of timely rains. 
If the southern horn be higher, it -portends famine and 


fear. 

TAHA AAAS TASS THY | 

arr waad coat SifrarAIaG | ot 

Sloka 17.—If the Moon should appear with only 

one horn, with one of the horns shorn off, or with one 
of the horns bent downwards, or appear like a full Moon 
while in reality it is not so, the person who observes 
such a Moon singly on the first day of the bright half 
of a month will meet with immediate death. 


Cf. aaradigar 

STIAAIAT A YA aTEraaArse | 

qeaaqiqay a: wawe fat aa u 

TMaAAR: erat eerargaied aera! | 
Bent elhaa very atraag: shes teil 
ACTIAWMIST? FAIG? ara wat F | 
FR AHS Jaga wats ee 


ao 


46 | geedfgararg = FAdh. IV SI. 20-21 


at Paneqhtivatecdiftae’ az: | 
ger gitrant frraraeedg gag: Roy 
Slokas 18-20.—All about the configurations have 
been described. There are other shapes also of the 
Moon as detailed below : a tiny Moon indicates drought, 
while that which is big is declared to be a fore 
runner of plenty of good crops. A form slender in the 
middle is termed Vajra and indicates risk to people 
from hunger and feverish preparations by kings for war; 
while the Moon of the form of tabor denotes peace 
and plenty to the people. A Moon with a very broad 
disc deriotes large influx of wealth to the king, while a 
corpulent Moon will make people eat richfood and a 
slender Moon will give food and grain that is most 
agreeable (or costly ?). 


Cf. teat: 
fasnarat Aart agdeuraaeaza: | 
avafedt eta ar ag @ aaaeaes 0 


THA SIUA eagerla: We FAaed 
VaURIAAA Asses | 
MET ET TUT ALAYOM THT WITT 
Ve waeaat ad gad Ht aalH mA zeit 
Sloka 21.—When the Moon’s horn is dashed by 
the five planets (other than the two luminaries) the 
following are the effects: if Mars be the planet thus 
dashing, kings living in the neighbourhood and who are 
wicked will perish. If the planet so cutting be Saturn, 
there will be peril through weapons, hunger and fear. 
If it be Mercury, it indicates famine and drought. If it 
be Jupiter, the important kings will die, while the petty 


Adh. IV. Sl. 22-24] aquisvara: 41 


chiefs will be affected if Venus be the planet concerned. 
These effects will be mild and partial if the Moon bein 
the bright half; if she be in the dark half, the effects 


described will fully come to pass, 
Cf, aaraalgar 


TAA TAMSHAM ACIARS FI 
apracanterea ag wait: saa: u 
fra: aa away aaa gfeeary 
ATTY AVR STTCAR IY | 
TAs AHI SSIS WN 
Aga GqararTy (12 
Sloka 22,.—When the Moon’s orb is divided into two 
by the contact of Venus in the middle, the people of 
Magadha, the Yavanas, the men of Pulinda, the Nepalese, 
the Bhringees, the Marwarees, the people of Cutch and 
Surat, the people of Madra, the Panchalas, the Kekayas, 
the Kuluthakas, the Purushadas (cannibals) and the men 


of Useenara (Kandahar) will be subjected to all sorts 
of miseries for 7 months. 


Tease p RUT ae Tor Tethys | 
fasta arara ca alae: aearqasreqita ara: 1123 
Sloka 28.—-When the Moon’s orb is cut by the 
conjunction of Jupiter, the people of Gandhara, Sauvee- 
raka, Sindhu and Keera, and all the corn, mountains, 
the king of the Dravida country and the Brahmin 
community will be affected for ten months. 
SIMI AE Teas AsATy 
Hisar nogKaay Aelia onsary 
carrer aaa HITS TAT 


MEUMPM IAA PAATITAT Nw! 
a. 6 


42 geeaigarara, «= [Adh. IV. S] 25-27 


Sloka 24.—When the planet Mars comes in con- 
junction with the body of the Moon and obstructs her, 
kings who are ready for war with their cavalry, carriages, 
etc., the Traigartas (of Lahore), Malawas. Kaulindas, 
Chieftains, the Sibees, the people of Ayodhya and their 
kings, the Kauravas, the people of the country of Virata 
and Sukthi, their kings and other important Kshatriya 
chiefs will suffer for a course of six months. 


aaa ata waar amiga agaraar | 
SMCHMAAVSS: Ratacaaraglsyat Nail 


Sloka 25.—When the Moon's orb is cut or obstructed 
by Saturn, the Yaudheyas, the ministers, the people of 
the Kurus, the Arjunas and the rulers of the eastern 


countries, these will suffer misery for a period of ten 
months. 


WTI AAW a Wsasaa as WATE: | 
AWA SI at atae Geant aya Aaa: eeu 
Sloka 26.—The following people will suffer mise- 
ries when Mercury forms a conjunction with the Moon 
and then emerges out of her orb; the Magadhas, 


Mathuras and those living on the banks of the river 
Vena. In the other places, it will b2 like Krita Yuga. 


aqnivqiaaaaal aay: Pikaar alse Bra: | 
SUqgasiasars Boas s wlenz RV. 


Sloka 27,—When the Moon is obstructed by Ketu, 
the peopie will be deprived of prosperity, health and 
plenty. The military population will perish and there 
will be much trouble through the excess of the thieving 
population. 


Adh. IV. Sl. 28-31]  sgaisvara: 43 


JRA ACT WAl Wa Wa sea | 
geud dat git Te Aeaia faa Neel 
Sloka 28.—When the Moon eclipsed by Rahu is 


cut by a meteor (Ulka), the king happening to own that 
star as his natal one dies. 


Of. aniaaigar 
SEAT TEI aHAA AT efta | 
Baar WETSMTAlG: Aawe: Feet: ator: | 
TAAAA? THT! WUT I FSSAMTATAUTAATAT UAB 
Sloka 29,—If the Moon be of ash colour, dirty’ 
reddish, deprived of rays and dark in form and appear 


broken or shaky, people will suffer from hunger, tumult, 
pestilence, disease and danger from thieves. 


WSIg‘eeHIA Hie Hara 
qeaqligaiggaa WwasT Bez: | 
Be: Hal Mia vfieala a Hara 
a esad @ aa aaa fas Rol 
Sloka 80.-—If the Moon appear white like snow, 
Kunda (Jessamine) or Kumuda (lotus) flower and crystal) 
as if she were placed above by Goddess Parvati after 
polishing her with great effort with the idea of deriving 


happiness at night (from Siva), it is a harbinger of peace 
and prosperity to the entire land, 


US iy arenas way aaaa als Ns ass | 
aia elieaeaaT Geaarat Hl Ts aes Saas T I 
Sloka 51.—During the bright half of the Moon, 
if her growth be regular, the Brahmins and Kshatriyas 
as also the people will rise to power and prosperity. , 


44 sea cara [Adh. V. Sl. 1-2. 


Their prosperity, etc., will be moderate if her growth 
be medium. If it be less, the prosperity also will dwindle. 
These effects will be reversed in the dark half. 


oO FO 


a Bqqammeane: Raat qaata aga at | 
aapanaatgarl wala gut asa gale: tt 
Sloka 82.—The Moon leads to victory and pros- 
perity to the whole mankind when she is as bright as 
the Kumuda flower, lotus-stalk and a pearl-necklace, 
and whose digits increase or decrease proportionately to 
the number of Tithis that have elapsed and who remains 
umechanged in her gait, appearance and rays. 
Thus ends the Fourth Adbyaya on the ‘Course of the Moon.’ 


agar: WMll Rahu. 
qAaaaamesaay fau Heawa@wacy | 
moras aeat ard aaeas 20 
Sloka 1.—A demon’s head, though cut off for his 
having devoured nectar, is still not deprived of life, it is 
said, as a result of the potency of nectar and that head 
became a planet, so declare some sages. 
QU ST GeIMABTT: 
tesraau ugdtaarga gu | 
Maswishe a seq wiser agat wa: wera. 


STPMSSIB AAA ANHS A IIT WTA | 
ATT TARIBISTATIALCHAS AAs 112! 


Sloka 2.—His disc is similar in form to those of 
the Sun and the Moon, but he is not visible in the 
heavens except on Parva days (New and. Full Moon 
days) on account of his blackness in colour. Owing to 


Adh. V. Sl. 3} qwaqalseary: 45 


a boon conferred by Brahma, he is visible only at the 
time of eclipses and not on other days. 

Simhika begged of Sage Kasyapa at an unseasonal hour 
for progeny. Emraged at this untimely request, he gave her 
2 Son who was dreadful like Yama. ‘This son came to be called 
Rahu. As soon as he was born, he fought and sustained a 
defeat at the hands of the son of Aditi. Humiliated by this, 
he performed severe penance for 10,000 divine years on the 
summit of the Himalayas. He asked God Brahma to confer 
on him the status of a planet, immortality, victory over the 
Gods and power to devour the two luminaries. At this, the 
Lord spoke smilingly thus: “ You will find it extremely hard 
to digest these two; still, be it so’ So saying, the Lord 
vanished. Then Rahu rushed at them. Then God Vishnu 
hurled his discus, chopped his head off and said, ‘ Let the 
creator's words however, not go to waste. In your respective 
periods you may devour the two luminaries and thereby indicate 
good and bad things for the world.”’ 


FASAAHS PARA HYicaeaes | 
ce Uf ° ON 
RATATAT THAT Vepareaq ll 
Sloka 38-—QOne school of learned men says that 
Rahu—son of Simhika—is of a serpentine form with only 


the face and the tail ; while another class maintains that 
he is formless and of the nature of pure darkness. 

aut a atqagz: 

faigeraazeqre Wes TeSZarsa | 

araare qt argatearzeuisea 

aura afae: 

AIHA WE: Walaequargat | 

STAYCM BC alararay Basya: 

aut a ae: 

MATHCAM UEATAVS TATA: | 

eresrqala atmer Tere gareay u 


46 | geecitaray {Adh. V. 4-7 


ale qat afrand firtisaat vals aveat ug: | 
aIngaraka gga ad Fara: lleli 


Sloka 4.—For, if Rahu has a form, travels in 
the zodiac, possesses a head and has a circular orb, how 
is it that he whose movement is fixed and uniform 
seizes the two luminaries who are situated 180° away 
from him ? 


AAITAME BZ AIS(Sa: ASqTT HY Ta | 
KONTAKT HAT TENS Ill 


Sloka 5.—If his gait has not been fixed, how is his 
exact position determined by calculation ? If he is to be 
distinguished by his tail and face, why should he not 
seize them at other eee (instead of only when 
180° apart.) ? 


AY FT FRET Y3aq FAA T A THN | 
 Faparaaa analy sary aaTST al 


Sloka 6.—For, if this Rahu who is of the form 
of a serpent is able to seize the Sun or the Moon through 
his tail or mouth, why should he not conceal or hide 
half of the zodiac which is the interval between his head 
and tail f 


Wess We MMe TAsMTaassaTisea FF | 
qeannlaateta Teas Bashy Tsaq Ill 


Sloka 7.—If there should be two Rahus, when the 
Moon. has set or risen and is eclipsed by one Rahu, 
the Sun (who is 180° from the Moon) should also be 
eclipsed by the other Rahu whose rate of motion is 
also similar. 


Adh, V. Sl, 8-11] waSsar7: 47 


Wort GE arenas wages | 
TUENAT TATA TAA Tsig (lei 
Sloka 8.—In her own eclipse, the Moon enters the 
shadow of the Earth, and in that of the Sun, the solar 
disc. Therefore it is that the lunar eclipse does not 


commence at the western limb, nor:the solar at the 
eastern limb. 


FIA BSA WRU aaa zea | 

fale iis qasauaTaaiztiae uh 
Sloka 9.—-Just as the shadow of a tree goes on 
increasing on one side on account of the motion of the 


Sun, so is the case with the Earth’s shadow every night 
by its hiding the Sun during its rotation. 


PNCATAAUT BS Besranray Aaa: | 
Tt TAUAGaISIalaa aar aka ell 


Sloka 10.—If the Moon, in her course towards the 
East and placed in the 7th house from the Sun, does 
not swerve much either to the north or the south, she 
enters the shadow of the earth. 

dat @ marfaare 

wot area tay arsleausia 4 

Gal (eee ery are: CUTER Ml 


n 


a, * 


FRSA BIT UAAFTTAT AAAS Tyg | 

aaeaAAyr TeagRIH TENA 1221 

Stoka 11.—The Moon moving from the , west 
conceals the solar disc from below just like a cloud. 
The solar eclipse is therefore different in various 
countries according to the visibility of the eclipsed disc, 


48  geeditarara, [Adh. V. SI. 12-13 


aut 4 qaaara 

gear carga qaadishattramitar | 

@ WATT Al VSAal AIAESBMAE: 
aataae aaa cares: 
Worn wget | ears F THETA 
aat Se Heard 

Forge we: {4 srzale araarmare | 
faait aga: gearrageya 


AAU Heer TosIqrTdisgassa: | 
Gey aadaisaafiem fart tawala 22 
Sloka 12,.—In the case of a lunar eclipse, the con- 
cealing agency is very big, while in that of the solar, it 1s 
small. Hence in semi-lunar and semi-solar eclipses, 
the luminous horns are respectively blunt and sharp. 
aut a welared 
agfeegruazoi Susfsait ads Tarwsea: | 
RerswN we sen anaisaes az U 


wI_IIIMMgHA Rexeiarrara: | 

URTV: WATKAT 18 

Sloka 18.—Thus the cause for the eclipses has 
been given by our ancient masters possessed of divine 
sight. Hence, the scientific truth is that Rahu is not 
at all the cause of that. 


aur | senearea 

afy wg: aearagege sagas RH aur ars | 

Rag aged aa Ga qa u 

fe sisfaaay qat ugeneadt gat cfare | 

aaleqed A aay UPHA TeNAsegr: | ; 


Adh. V.SI. 1417). vanitsera: ‘49 
aa<tinaciiartretinjireinnaticingenanallfasnsniinneiseninionnsnnhirrenisC et jens ena 


TSAI WEAA I MATISTATTT: | 
AAMTAZII TAA AA F AAT evil 
aaa BIS ayaa Faraszss Tess | 


VENA TAaaitraseyTssa Fat Ua 
Slokas 14-15, The following boon has been con- 
ferred by Brahman on Rahu,. the Demon: “You shall 
have to live and rest satisfied with whatever gifts and 
oblations that may be given at the time of an 
eclipse. ’’ During that period his presence is recognised. 
There are two places or nodes for the Moon caused by 
her deviation south ornorth and this is ascertained by 
astronomical calculation. The ascending node is termed 
Rahu. 
a Sahaelt Hiaaget Asad Aereat | 
MUAH BS AIIM TTS INT 12 
Sloka 16.~-An eclipse can by no means be ascer- 
tained throngh symptoms in the form of portents, For, 
these latter, vizg-, fall of meteors, etc., occur at other 
times also. 
WAITS Pas TET TAT AAs | 
aS @ qasweat a Afarays AIAN gen 
Sloka I7.—~It is not correct to say that an eclipse 
cannot occur unless five planets combine; it is also 
incorrect for the learned to suppose that on the previous 
Ashtami day the eclipse and its characteristics can be 
guessed by examining the appearance of a drop of oil 
poured on the surface of water. 
UT BW Eat: | 
ex csameact Cy 4 aed wie 
“UR & ergeeaw § Up nyt eee FB 
8.7 


“50 geedigaraa = [Adh: V, Sil. 18.23 
: nr rennenareentinnnant 


werat qitaa: as wea aa | 

waka fasretaraa: quecaataa: 1 
TAs MA Raa asaasqaeat J | 
favqqaaaat Het Byars ay war 12Il 


Sloka 18.—The magnitude of the Sun’s eclipse is 
to be determined by the Moon’s deflection (parallax). 
The direction in which the eclipse commences has to be 
found out through the deflection and angles of the Moon 
known as @7aaea and aaa (Ayanavalana and Aksha- 
valana). The actual time of the eclipse has to be found 
out by noting the exact time of conjunction of the Sun 
and the Moon. These have been described in detail in 
my astronomical work Pancha Siddhantika. 


TOMAS TAI AY saa RAG: | 
aAaIaeHat Tomiqaqey eae 112911 


Sloka 19.—The following seven deities are in their 
order the lords of the successive six-month-periods since 
creation. Brahma, the Moon, Indra, Kubera, Varuna, 
Agni and Yama. 

ala feuqgaia: santas waaeag | 
ASTATT TAT Vet Agaragisey Rett 
wz yatta: aera ay Bay | 
Axs “ ° 
wresardaradara: Bas 7 uz 
Teds qaagsery | 
Trad Parret Tara TaraRE RA 
weet attra GFW, aad, SOTA! 
WEG WE TTA BoE. ge: IRR: 


AdksV. Sl 94]. sewpitswara: st 


Slokas 20-23.—During the.Parvan presided over by 
Brahman, the Brahmins and cattle will prosper. The 
whole period will be marked by happiness, health and 
abundance of corn. In the Moon’s Pagvan, there will 
be similar prosperity for the Brahmins and the quadru- 
peds; but the learned will suffer and there will be 
drought. In the six-month period owned by Indra, 
there will be quarrel among kings; crops of the autumnal 
season will fail and there will be no happiness. In the 
period owned by Kubera, rich people will suffer loss of 
wealth, but there will be general prosperity in the land.’ 
In Varuna’s period there will be no happiness for the: 
kings, but people will be happy and there will be: 
abundance of corn, In the six-month-period swayed by 
Agni—also known as Mitra— there will be plenty of 
crops; the people will be immune from disease and 
there will be abundance of water. During Yama’s: 
period, there will be norain; people will suffer from’ 
famine and there will be a general destruction of crops. 
In the event of an eigth Parvan occurring next to 
this owing to unusual causes or phenomena, there will be 
general suffering due to hunger, death and drought. 


Astaia TAT TAATIT TR IAT.| 
MAS SUAHTAN AF TAATA?T Uleil 


Sloka 24.—If an eclipse should occur a bit prior to 
the time actually calculated, there will be miscarriages 
and outbreak of war. In the case of the eclipse 
happening a bit after the expected time, flowers will 
wither, fruits will be destroyed and there will be general 
panic and destruction of crops. 

aaaT: | . | 

wera aead cant are ear 


52 qeeuigerara, «= FAdh. V. SI. 25.27 


was curat g wearat amie i 

grad @a{o aor fader Ptasae: | 

sa ghee: wal watin@aratanr: o 

aU @ Srsqq: 

MATAR A UE Ts CITT | 

aTaaraaagye: we get masala o 

daratwaes noah areca | 
WHenraae: Bre: asa areqag aay Well 

Sloka 25.—The effects of eclipses occurring a bit 
earlier or later than the actual time calculated have been 
described as stated above simply because they have been 
so stated in the ancient Sastras, However, the time 
calculated by a true astrologer will in no case prove 
inaccurate. 

Note here Varahamihira’s bold and dogmatic assertion that 
calculations done on proper lines will never be false. Conse- 
quently, there is absolutely no chance of there being any 
difference between the actual occurrence of an eclipse and the 
calculation. 


agatag ara seo wraraaiaar feafaas | 


WIAA TTI sTeATT lle 
Sloka 26.—If there should be both solar and lunar 
eclipses occurring in one and the same month, kings will 
suffer destruction through the open rebellion of their 
army. ‘There will further be terrible bloodshed. 
AT GT SATs 
GAHACGATA TH T TTA | 
qeert ae gy: aaegat ZT: i 
TAG AA TATA TA TTT TT | 
aime gare TIaEST ll 


Adh, V. Si, 28-31]  ganitseara: 53° 
sg Seen emergence mennitcinsenenomeAaremnmae stein serrate emg nsrensaasntnaanescemntgaaetiel 


Sloka 27.—If the Sun or the Moon rises or sets 
being eclipsed at the time, the crops of the aq-Sarat 
season will fail andthe kings in the land will suffer. If 
such an eclipse be a total one and if the eclipsed dise 
be aspected by malefics as well, there will be famine 
and pestilence all over the country. 

aa Se Farr: 

axrata qetadtged a are Tessie | 

ART YF AI AD sway wa fara ui 

wan aa Kaisa ar qensa ar | 

wrgiteriiia ser ardiena se A 

aq ST RATA: 

wads ofeaegreqaaedaia ar | 

araatsary Wersarg aa va faaretaa u 

sqastiaa arsit qieq Het WaT | 

Al BIA Caras awawea aay au a 

fat were atarat wa at naa var | 

Sag many waaay atgia warsars i 

Meo ag silaita AUA_ASr ar | 

Wageiag Gehry ssreaaT | 


malta astra ata ataaty | 

| areal Fagen eal atte aiscattar llzcll 
a iauiieatrggiratearTer fadtata | 
RVRACFO Sl Gadiaia aAaleaqars lei 
ReaTe acafarerge TAT SITs | 
MANA ATA IAs WT NRol 


MA WA TITAAISAATHIS | 
Ty BI Aregeresrenrat PHF was 03 VN 


5p | geeakarary: = [Adh. V.’S}, 28-31. 


«+ -Slokas 28-31.—If the eclipse should begin when 
the-Sun or the Moon has just half-risen, the low tribes. 
Chandalas, etc., will suffer and all sacrifices will be 
destroyed. (If the visible portion of the sky be divided 
into seven equal divisions and if such an event happen 
in the first division, those that earn their livelihood with 
the help of fire such as gold-smiths, virtuous men, 
Brahmins and hermits will suffer. Agriculturists, here- 
tics, traders, the Kshatriyas, leaders of the army, these 
will be destroyed, if the eclipse happens in the second 
division. \,The eclipse that occurs in the third division 
will cal on distress to artisans, artists, the Sudras, 
the Mlechchas and ministers. (When the eclipse happens 
in mid-day, 2. ¢., the central or fourth division, the king 
and the central country will be destroyed; corn will 
sellat fair rates) Quadrupeds, ministers, people in the 
harem and Vaisyas will perish when the eclipse occurs 
in the 5th division of the sky. The eclipse in the 
sixth division will destroy the womankind and the 
Sudras; while thieves and people living in the border 
countries will be annihilated when the eclipse occurs 
at the setting time. When the end of the eclipse 
happens in the several divisions of the sky referred to 
above, the effect will prove good to the corresponding 


people. 
AUG SBqT: 
afarattat neat AAaeTT TET | 
aasreatt Gar qeayitat am waa tl 
aeAin raster avant rata t 
qartt a gata Sqe avaditray t 


Adh. V. SI, 32-34] qaaiseara: 1685 


wsarat agi ata eatit saga Ta | 
AEYTAAABISVTAA TR: AHAAS I 
Aaa waedtaeasmarat Za WaT | 
aM I FFT: | 


Rat dat gi reat raat aa ar wag | 
deat det fasratare Vat Baars ti 


fsaaadigaraa agg alata zea | 
UgeeMeeas aragy sed faraty 122A 
Tera icaaa aaa eegTTTATS | 
aeaaqaieaqal aeaaieaTaAga: 1331) 
TAT Assn Hila agat aaa cay | 
CHRIRATHAAATTTT Mes RV 


Slokas 32-34.—Rahu when found in the Uttarayana 
will kill the Brahmins and kings, while in the Dakshi- 
nayana the Vaisya and the Sudra classes will be affected. 
If the solar and lunar eclipses begin at the four quarters, 
viz., the north, east, south, and west, it will kill respec- 
tively the Brahmins, the Kshatriyas, the Vaisyas and 
the Sudras. If found in the half-quarters (or corners), 
viz,, north-east, south-east, south-west, and north-west, 
the Mlechchas, people who are marching, those that 
earn their livelihood by fire— potters, smiths and the like — 
and fire-worshippers will be affected. Further, if Rahu 
begins in the south, water-animals and elephants, 
etc., will suffer and if in the north, the cattle will suffer. 
If Rahu commences the eclipse in the east, he will 
inundate the earth with floods; if:in the west, agri 
culturists, servants and dependants, seeds and seedlings 
will be destroyed, 


56 gureifgarare, = [Adh, V. Sl. 35-37 


Sat VW HsqqT: 


qi ateead are wnrgeaalae4rs | 

wey HSAy Cea Vet Taras: Ta: 

westy aifrzrsy afta faleeer: falksrqa: 1 gfe 
aaa qatar 

satay faxagat ordtat Maracie | 
fatamiqnat wenger ataiadlgy 
Aauaeary erageaaa sar g zayzI | 
aarmara gals qarea Gates: —eia 


TASHA: BEATS ARTTTATA! | 

’ Sftalea a a garyaral a aigigrarita arater 12411 

Sloka 85.—When the Sun or the Moon occupy sign 

Mesha and is eclipsed there, people of the Panchala 

country, the Kalingas, the Surasenas, Kambojas, the 

Udras (the people of the modern Orissa), hunters, those 

employed in the military, men who earn their living 
by fire, all these will suffer. 


WI TaAIsa WA TIA A A ACAATT AT | 
Giegratiea weRe TA DiaHsway TT 341) 
Sloka 86.—If the Sun or the Moon be eclipsed 


while in Vrishabha, shepherds, cattle, owners of cows 
and men who have risen to eminence will suffer. 


ya caIRA TN ATA aioas Zaria: | 
_ BYaas: aTSH Aa TAA TAeTA: Roll 
Sloka 87.—1lf the eclipse referred to above be in 
Mithuna, ladies of nobility, kings and powerful com. 
peers, viz., ministers and the like, persons versed ii 
the arts, people living in,the banks of the Jumna, people 
of Balkh, the Viratas,- the Suhmas—all these will suffer 


‘Adh. V. Sl. 38-40] s- tarattsxara: 57 


WMUSSIY AIBA AY Wagesspa;y | 
qialaicaneia ead alt Getta wae uc 


Sloka 88,—When the Sun or the Moon is eclipsed 
in sign Karkataka, the following people will suffer: 
the Abheeras, the Sabaras, the Pallavas, the Mallas 
(wrestlers), the Mathsyas, the Kurus, the Sakas, the 
Panchalas and all those that are infirm. There will 
also be the destrtiction of food grains. 


faz glarcantiasaagary 
UMMA TAMIA | 
gy ¢ qUaAsaaTIaHIT 


POVED CACM CRUICUGIE MCHC MEST | 
Sloka 39.—An eclipse in Simha will bring on 
destruction to the whole tribe of hunters, the Mekalas, 
people who are valorous, people similar in status to 
kings, kings and men living in forests. | When the 
eclipse occurs in Kanya, the crops, poets, writers, 
musicians, the inhabitants of the Asmaka, and Tripura 
countries and all the regions that are endowed with 
paddy fields will suffer destruction, 
STASI WMMAT yeaa MASTS TET | 
AeoeaN AACA Hey MATATTATTM AT lol) 
Sloka 40.—When the eclipse happens in Tula Rasi, 
people of Avanti, Aparanthya (western border), people 
of good disposition, trading class, men of the Dasarna 
country, the Marus and the Kachchapas, all these will 
suffer. When the eclipse takes place in Vrischikh, the 
people of Udumbara, Madra, Chola, Yaudheya tribe, 
soldiers with poisoned weapons and trees will be 
destroyed. | | | : 
oe) 


58 sea carary [Adh, V. Sl. 41-42 


faeqq is another reading for atgq7 
qfeqeqarearawanaaeeaard 
SE ICEO CIC ECCCICCEICE 
SAAN T Aleagatia atary 
yesh FIST Braga lis 2 


Sloka 41.—If the Sun or the Moon be eclipsed while 
in Dhanus, the chief ministers in the country, the horses, 
the people of Videha, wrestlers, the Panchala people, 
physicians, traders, people who are rough and hard, men 
who know the use of arms, all these will suffer. The 
eclipse in Makara will do away with fishes, ministers 
and their families, all men of the lower class, people who 
are clever in the use of magic and herbs, people that are 
old and infirm and those living by weapons. 


erascahittard war anigetacac- 
AUATEATAISSATAS THA, SAAT: TAU | 
Wiad AMRTAMALATTEAT Teqla TATA 
MARAT AES HAITASeT Vl 


Sloka 42.—Through the eclipse occurring in sign 
Kumbha, people in the interior of mountains, those living 
in the west, bearers of burdens, thieves. the Abheeras, the 
Daradas, all nobles, people living in Simhapura and the 
Barbaras will be affected. The eclipse formed in sign 
Meena. will destroy the substances that are obtained in 
the shores of oceans and those derived from the seas, 
people living in forests, learned men and those that earn 
their livelihood through water and water-products.) The 
effects of eclipses occurring in any of the asterisms 
will be felt in those countries signified by them as 


Adh. V. SI. 43-46]  varatstara: 59 


explained in the Nakshatra Kutma Adhyaya. (Ch. XIV, 
infra) 
alralq{ is another reading for 441{. 
quiadizararag 
Balada aay Get aaa died aaTaq | 
aigd Ten wa agaayara ws 
ta (a S 
ASA TASASSTAA ATA TATA STL: | 
TA ASIAHAAISeA Bla F TA MA Uv 


Sloka 43.—The eclipses consist of ten varieties, v2z., 
Savya, Apasavya, Leha, Grasana, Nirodha, Avamardana, 
Aroha, Aghrata, Madhyatama and Thamonthya. 

AeA AMA TAHsyzd ala gas = | 

ATWEY AUUGAHUTAS: AATATT VV 

Sloka 44.—When Rahu is on the southern side of the 

Sun or the Moon during an eclipse, floods will occur and 
there will be happiness and freedom from fear. When 
Rahu is on the northern side, there will be oppression 
through the sovereign and thieves and people will die in 
consequence, If the lunar eclipse commences from the 
southeast, it is called Savya, while, from the north-east, 
it is called Apasavya. Inthe case of the solar eclipse, 
the respective directions are northwest and southwest. 

MEQiqate aaaargal wes ae a Se: | 

TUATHA WTA FT TT wal Veit 

Sloka 45.—The eclipse is called %¢ (Leha) where the 
orb of the Sun or the Moon is enveloped (as if licked) 
by (the tongue of) darkness. All beings will be happy 
and there will be abundance of water all over the earth. 


maalala war saa: get at TeasqaseTgT | 
walagiadena: tet | eelagaray Weal 


60 SAA AT [Adh. V. Sl, 47-50 


Sloka 46,—When a third or a fourth part of the disc 
or even half is concealed (by darkness), it is called waa 
(Grasana); a flourishing king will suffer loss of wealth 


and countries which are thriving and prosperous. will 
suffer devastation. 


Cc” “a bas n ° ~ 
qaedy Deleat wer foodind antag | 
a fica Asa: caleHy ANAT v9 
Sloka 47.—When Rahu eclipses the disc all round 
leaving a lump of thick darkness in the middle, it is called 


fawta (Nirodha). The effect of this will be that all crea- 
tures will be happy. 


CK A NN ~ Ae bat 
aaaaaiaia eas asia ale Fae fag | 
TUAMATN TAA faATAT VVcit 

Sloka 48.—When Rahu conceals the entire orb and 
is in that position for a considerably long period, it is 


called aaaza (Avamardana) and the result of it will be 
the destruction of leading kings and important countries. 


TA Te WS TAMATAAG es4G YI: | 
eS ° 
AMUMAG ETAT TKE TAT SW! 

Sloka 49.—If soon after the termination of the 
eclipse, the luminary be again enveloped in darkness, it is 
called antiga (Arohana) ; there will be mutual strife among 
kings causing great fear and anxiety. 

‘ » aN fon Lat 
TAN LABY AAMT AAMT: | 
CXATISSAA TA GASTSTNAS AMA? oll 

Sloka 50.—The eclipse is known as asta (Aghrata) 

when it appears on a part of the disc like a mirror filled 


with the vapour of hot breath when blown on it; and it 
indicates timely rains and prosperity to the people. 


Adh. V. SI. 51-53] qaalstara: ‘61 


Hey amaas Rawek ms FAs ata: | 
TAACIAT Bla FEAATAT J 142i 
Sloka 51.—The eclipse is termed ataaa (Madhya- 
tama) when Rahu appears in the centre of the disc and 
the entire (circular) portion surrounding the same is un- 
concealed (bright all round). It will affect people living 
in the central countries, and people will suffer from colic. 
There will be general panic all over the country. 

This phenomenon occurs only in a Solar eclipse. 
GUeaaTES Get ALY TAAASHUTSA | 
AAAAUATT AAAAMERTTT FT URL 

Sloka 52.—When the entire surrounding portion in 
the disc appears thick-dark while in the middle or central 
portion it is only slight, the eclipse is called Tamonthya. 
There will be danger to the crops through locusts, etc. 
and fear from thieves. 

The Eetibadhas or injuries are six in number, viz., 

AACSB HH: USA Ys: 

RUAMA UAA: TA SAT: TRA: 

excessive rain, drought, rats, grasshoppers, !parrots and 

neighbouring kings. 

aM A BIT: 

Qeri | Alas CqsTasy Ff aeHT: | 

Sls TA: age: wquad Steaewray t 

awTT TACT: BrawTe IIASA: | 

Maa Maas aa grata oiGar: oy 

SUS BMG sara aizaTaAT | 

ACG AMG Beas Hera aqeaswny ti 

ge aale wes qeurratiadt wag i—ze 

aa Sagi armordiet = Rea | 
Siar det Tt gaTT aay 43h 


62 geeaieatata. = [Adh. V. SI]. 54-59 


ated Tea Taraaifatias esa: | 
alte aamnaarasaetaisy gaa uv 
ReHrged sar gear zadisr | 
MA TaghaaigaeaRegs TW UA 
Riaareatiesaaa aaa Aiareszy | 
BINA AAT SARs Hoo TTA 4H 
faaaantrtiar aa etal vaq afaara | 
aasqapaad THEI I TAA | Yl 
TARVIN ats aly aiegeaway | 
AUAAAAIA WESFAATAT UF! 4c 
qighalgaer: aaretara wala Fes | 
TIUTAHAVATAMISTT DARN NK! 


Slokas 58-59.—lf the eclipsed disc appear white, 
there will be peace and prosperity all over, but the Brah- 
mins will suffer. If the colour be like that of fire, there 
will be risk from fire and people who Jive by or eke their 
livelihood through fire, viz., gold and silversmiths, etc., 
will suffer. ‘If Rahu’s colour be parrot’s hue, there will 
be outbreak of diseases, and crops will be destroyed by 
excessive rain, etc.) When the colour is reddish or tawny, 
quick-footed animals such as camels and Mlechchas will 
suffer and there will be famine. When the colour re- 
sembles that of the rays of the rising Sun, there will be 
famine and drought and birds will suffer. When the 
colour is grey, there will be prosperity all round and 
limited rain. When the eclipsed portion of the disc is 
reddish in colour or of the colour of the pigeon, or of gold 
or yellow-black, people will suffer from hunger. When it 
is of the colour of the pigeon or dark, the Sudras will 


Adah. V. Sl. 60-62] QAASCATT: 63 
suffer from diseases. When it is the colour of a (topaz ?) 
spotless jewel (bluish-yellow), the Vaisyas will suffer des- 
truction and there willbe prosperity in the land; if it be 
similar in colour to that of burning flame, there will be 
risk from fire; and if the disc be of the colour of a mine- 
ral, (gold ore?), there will be wars. If the colour be dark 
as that of the Durva stalks or yellowish, there will be out- 
break of epidemics. And when Rahu is like the Patala 
flower in colour, there will be risk from lightning and 
thunder-bolts. If the colour be a mixture of red and 
brown, it indicates the ruin of the Kshatriyas and the 
advent of drought. If the colour be similar to that of the 
rising Sun, the lotus or the rainbow, it forebodes the out- 
break of war. 


qaaq Tal eal Yangon ust F | 
dia antag frre aeacat a soll 


UR ware aaisaia saat ates | 
aa: Ries cha THAT FUNGI 
Slokas 60-.61.—When Mercury aspects the eclipsed 


Sun or the Moon, vhee, honey and oil willbecome dear 
and rare and kings will suffer. If Mars should aspect 
either of them in such a condition, there would be outbreak 
of war, risk from fire and danger from thieves. If Venus 
be the aspecting planet, there will be destruction of crops 
and there will also arise various miseries and troubles in 
the land. When Saturn is the planet that is aspecting, 
rains will fail, famine and risk from thieves will result: 


ATVARIDHANSH AEA TET TATA ar | 
grfaqensstsa aesagrana qataPats: ge 


64 geenfeararga §=[Adh. V. SI. 63-65 

Stoka 62.—Whatever untoward effects have been 
declared as a result of aspects by planets on either of the 
luminaries at the time of the commencement or conclu- 
sion of an eclipse, the intensity will be toned down and 
they will prove auspicious if only Jupiter’s aspect falls 
on the same, just as blazing fire is put out by water. 


~ Ly ~ 
Tet BAUMATs Garel HAI~ITTET | 
bo om bal 
Trdlenrtaes: ataRrrarisataiaaa: 1&3 
Sloka 63.—If at the time of an eclipse (whether 
solar or lunar) there should occur a strong wind, fall of 
meteors, dust storm, earthquake, total darkness or 
thunder-bolt, the eclipse will recur after 6, 12, 18, 24, 20 
and 36 months respectively. 
SWB Al Bq wawigia Area: | 
Wass Aa eaAIEITAA yaa A 
sesrat gaat ara WHarergat ar | 
weet @ ugiaa fa ante falsag on 
QUAUSMATA Bla As Brgy war ugia- 
AUAMATIT BAAHT TS ATAT! | 
eal YansaT:? fered fataad we Mev 
Sloka 64.—If at the time of an eclipse, Mars also 
by his conjunction with the Sun or the Moon as the case 
may be be eclipsed, people of Avanthi, those living at 


the banks of the Cauvery and Narmada and kings who 
have become arrogant will suffer misery. 


, weaalary Us Garat ATT | 
aiaqatagaigy ae falgaat sea uel 


Sloka 65.—If Mercury be in such a position, the 
people living in the tract of Jand between the Ganges 


Adh. V. Sl. 66-69]  vatssara: 65 


and the Jumna, on the banks of the Sarayu, those of 
Nepal, those living in the east coast and on the Sone 
riverside, the female folk, kings, warriors, boys and 
learned men, all will perish. 


mena aie Aeqakaiseaeta: | 
faeqacatiaaacyaiian aataat a esi 
Sloka 66.—In the case of Jupiter being thus eclipsed, 
learned men, kings, ministers, elephants, horses, people 
living on the banks of the Indus, including also those 
living to the north will all be destroyed. 
bat bal ba’ nal 
BIIAT VENT TATHPRIT TAIT: | 
q n ba 
aiaaa: faa: daha tera use 
Sloka 67.,—When Venus is (thus) eclipsed by Rahu, 
the people of Daseraka. of Kekaya, of Yaudheya, of 


Aryavartha, the Sibees, the woman-folk and the ministers 
and tribes will suffer misery. 


ay menageRTe RATT SHAT | 


TWaSaIaaAN AAA AAA Whe 
Sloka 68.—When Saturn is eclipsed, the men of 
Maru (of desert) of Pushkara, of Saurashtra, the minerals, 
etc. derived from the earth, people living in the Arbuda 
mountain, those of low caste, cowherds, inhabitants of 
the Pariyatra mountain, all these suffer loss very soon. 


BUAFUAASTTAAATAMY ATAWMAW RAI 
HATTUAT Waray Hala qarrag | 
SMA BoRCITU AAAI Al , 
ee ahaa warala aa gfraieaaq Si 

| Sloka 69.—If the solar or lunar eclipse should occur 


in the lunar month of Kartika, men that eke ‘their tiveli- 
qu. 9 


66: ) gecaiearara = [Adh, V. Sl. 70-72 


hood through fire, those belonging to Magadha, kings in 
the East, the Kosalas, the Kalmashas, the Surasenas, 
people of Benares, all these wiil be affected The king 
of the Kalingas along with his ministers and servants will 
very soon meet with his end. Rahu will torment the 
entire Kshatriyas. Other people will be happy and there 
will be plenty all over the land. 


RMA HITHT TPS Tata eeacaieaHtay | 
q daviaia Meka aa gahaq Aaaaga lve 
Sloka 70.—If the eclipse happens in the month of 
Margasira, people of Kashmir, the Kosilas and the 
Pundras will suffer. The animals living in the forest and 
the people of the West will perish. So also the Soma- 
yajees. There will be good rain and people will be happy 
and prosperous. 
aN Raa: aeaaTea: geAU eat: | 
ea Aaeayq J Aeqale aa | fareaqiqagihaagwM_ 192M 
Sloka 71.—When the eclipse falls in the month of 
Pushya, there will be trouble tothe Brahmins: and the 
Kshtriyas. The Saindhavas, the Kukaras and the Videhas 
will also suffer. There will be only small'snowers There 
will be famine and panic. 


are @ AlaqaMTNAgAAT 
AMAUMMAAIY BRTATHTT | 
aMIFHAIAA Tala UE- 
CCA CCUCCCIE TIGMICLS] 


Sloka 72.—lIf the eclipse happens in the month of 
Magha, Rahu gives trouble to those that revere their 
parents, Brahmins born in the Vasishtha Gotra, men that 


Adh. V. SI. 73-75] WMASvaIa: 67 


are fully engaged in their sacred study and in the perfor- 
mance of their religious duties, elephants and horses, the 
people of Vanga, Anga and Kasi. There will be plenty 
of rain to the satisfaction of the agriculturists. 


PE MCUC RIC MCI CACC TC TICIC 
TATAAATUFAlAl TARAAWI AAT F WR 


Sloka 73.—The eclipse occurring in the month of 
Phalguna will give trouble to the people of Vanga, 
Asmaka, Avanthika and those living in the Mekala moun- 
tain, dancers, agriculturists, decent ladies, bow-makers, 
Kshatriyas and hermits. 


asat ¢ faMsaRTATTHA 
STI iA | 
SHR ATATAY WATT 
args taaagisa APaaTH Moe!) 


Sloka 74.—lf an eclipse happen in the lunar month 
of Chaitra the artists, writers, musicians, dancing girls, 
chanters of Vedas, goldsmiths and jewellers, the people 
of Paundra, Udira, Kaikaya and Asmaka will suffer. The 
lord of the Devas (God Indra) will be quixotic in the 
matter of supplying rain to the Earth (¢.e., there will be 
rain in some parts and no rain in others). 


AMAA Tey Aargaqrara Baralasis agen | 
CEUGAMATH Hos AITTIE feea afraniag tt 

Sloka 75.—The eclipse occurring in the lunar month 
of Vaisakha will destroy the cotton crop, sesamum‘and 
green gram. The descendants of Ikshvaku, the Yaudhe- 
yas, the Sakas and the Kalingas will suffer. But the 
crops will be plenty all over the land. 


58 | qeaiea4rany [Adh. V. Sl. 76-79 


SUE AER AAUITTET TAA WT EMT | 
METTAT eT ATT AEA TE TAAL FATT ATOR 
Sloka 76.—If the eclipse occur in the lunar month 
of Jyeshta, the kings, their queens, Brahmins, the crops 
and the rains, crowds of people, good-looking persons, 
the Salvas and the group of hunters will suffer destrution. 
MMSTAYTATATAATIAATY ban AY | 
J PATRAS Ae adid TeeMSSTIAA [\S\9T| 
Sloka 77.—When the eclipse falls in the lunar month 
of Ashadha, the banks of wells, tanks, etc., will be des- 
troyed and rivers will dry up. People living on fruits and 
roots, the people of Gandhara, Kashmir, Pulinda and 


China will suffer destruction. The rains will not be 
evenly distributed. 


BATA agieaaraTas SARGVATA 
mre AeASAASala SEY AS? WaT | 
RFTUAHARA ALTA Waal APEAHUAAT- 
ACTA AYUACEAAAUAL BUMTATT 1191 


Sloka 78.—If an eclipse should occur in the lunar 
month of Sravana, the following, viz., people of Kashmir, 
Pulindas, men of China, the Yavanas. those born in 
Kurukshetra, Gandhara and those living in the central 
tracts and the Kambojas and all whole-hoofed animals 
and also the grains of the autumnal season will suffer 
damage and perish. With the exception of those stated 
above, all those living elsewhere will be happy and live 
in plenty. 

POF ATT FURY FO Sig Baicra, TLATIAHLA | 
aint = adiaadt Peta wtaERIZItsePIAt 098 


Adh, V. SI. 80-82] Taq iseary: 69 
a eg ee ee 


Sloka 79:~—The undermentioned will be affected 
when the eclipse happens in the Junar month “of Bhadra- 
pada: the Kalingas, the Vaugas, the Magadhas, the 
Surashtras, the Mlechchas, the Suveeras, the Daradas 
and the Asmakas ; women will suffer miscarriages, But 
there will be prosperity in the land. 

BUA Tal aeTeagy— 
qigtetarqazaaaaty gag | 
araates aaa at Petar 
TaSTISAg Yataga lcolt 

Sloka 80.—When Rahu is seen eclipsing the Sun or 
the Moon in the lunar month of Aswayuja, the people of 
Kamboja, China, the Yavanas, the surgeons, the Valhikas 
those living on the banks of the Indus, the Anarthas, the 
Paundras, physicians and the Kiratas will perish. But 
there will be abundance of food and provisions, 

aaa aalaadigarargy 

SAQIUTBIT SATIS: AAT HE | 

UgaiUeaaeaywEt geaeqary u 

sgelangacr Rie: assed a aw a 
Hear Aes ea ahaaaiian Ween 

Sloka 81.—The liberation or the end of a solar or 
lunar eclipse is one of ten varieties : (1) efétorg3—Dakshi- 
Mahanu (2) aragy—Vamahanu (3) qe S&%t—Dakshina- 
Kukshi (4) aragr&—Vama Kukshi (5) atarnqrq— Dakshina. 
payu (6) wawg—Vamapayu (7) aeaga—Sanchhardana 
(8) Sw1—Jarana (9) avataqia—Madhya Vidarane and 
(10) aeafaqin—Antyavidarana. 


MMT AT TTEUcAsad ara: | 
AVA FAVE Tater wa sae lice 


70 seeaieaany [Adh. V. S], 83-85 


Slokas 82,—If the liberation of the Moon takes place 
in the south-east quarter of the orb, it is termed qfageqag 
—Dakshinahanubheda. The effect of this will be des- 
truction of crops, outbreak of diseases in thc face, trouble 
for the sovereign and advent of good rains. 

aM A BsZae: 

TAT FAUT: Bigqrazat az arsia | 

GAAMTA DT FEI FIAF FalenA 11 

qalaey aal Aaa TISATAITT | 
Bayt Varad Tata Feqiq ata 7 lez 

Sloka 83.—If the liberation of the Moon should 
happen in the northeast of the orb, it is known as aaeq 
—Vamahanu. The King’s son will be aftlicted with 
some sort of fear. Facial diseases and risk by weapons 
are indicated. Otherwise there will be food and provi- 
sions, 

aU BF BIW: 

qaragsqa wat FAA: | 

aangiaaal cena ae waeaia: | 
gist Frgarrraaagisat sleaot Raa: ic vl 

Sloka 84,—If the end of the eclipse happens on the 
southern side of the Moon’s orb, itis called afangfae— 
Dakshina Kukshi. There will be trouble to the King’s 
children and there will be a conflict with the enemies in 
that direction. 

aM | BIRAT: | 
qf: Bierie: Aigla Aral Was | 
WAyaANa aa ehoraigst Ta: Wi 
TACT SAAT ATACAAaT ea Teg! | 
aint THAT: Tay a ay AAT lel 


Adh. V. SI. 86-87] vaaitsvara: 71 


Sloka 85.—If Rahu while liberating the Moon be 
posited on the northern side of the orb, it is called arngra- 
wq Vamakukshibheda. Women will suffer abortion, and 
the crops will only be medium, | 


aal A Byaq: 
Gsarat F vat nat aag arauza: 
int wifaaraa @eqraraqaaa: tl 
jC. _ SS an A AQ A 
ARIUS TATA TF WyeAaT al | 
ats 
TASNST WSsaleq Tiga aay lick 
Sloka 86.—If at the time of liberation Rahu be 
posited in the southwestern side of ,the Moon’s orb, it 
is called zanT1gy —Dakshinapayu; if in the northwestern 
side, it is known as ataqrq. The effect is that people will 
suffer from pain in the anus or the generating organs in 
both the cases. The rains will be poor. Inthe case 
of a@raqigqg--Vamapayu, the wife of the king will die. 
aM A BZ: 
qgwana Wet arasrakaraay: | 
Tanaag faraigry Waray Gat Ul 
TAN WAVY Heal AAT TAIT | 
CC ALA ° 
asscalala AAATaAeas ATA: llcvll 


Sloka 87.—If the commencement and end of the 
eclipse be both in the eastern side of the Moon's orb,it is 
termed a*8%4—Sanchhardana. There will be prosperity 
atnd peace in the country, abundance of crops and general 
contentment among thc people. 

TU BRIA: | 


Maate sar Tt wea g aa WaT | 
WAM RY Gafacqiswsyz ti 


72 qeeaigararga, = [Adh. V. SI. 88-90 


meagan altar qaeqain ¢ aay | 
FSAI (SIA A ATF led TA Har? ilcell 


Sloka 88.—If in the case of an eclipse the com- 
mencement was in the east of the orb and the end or 
liberation be in the west, it is known as si, The effect 
in this case will be that people will suffer from hunger 
and risk from weapons. People will become anxicus 
and there will be no kind of relief to them. 

at A BAT: | 

qian waa uUgeqiat faqaia | 

SULHAT AA ATES AW TIAF I! 

wey ai THI: Waa TeqEMATTT ATH | 
AeaRHE Aly Hwa alaseaeqz cll 

Sloka 89.—If the liberation of the eclipse should 
begin from the middle of the Moon’s orb and there be 
light first there in consequence, it is called avaragen 
Madhya Vidarana: The effect will be disaffection in the 


king’s army. People will be peaceful and prosperous ; 
but there will not be much rain, 


aU A BATT: | 

UAT MBIA ALA VTE STMAATH ATT | 
qaeay Asal TEs AA TASHATTITTTT | 
TEMUNCASTATT!? UNTAATATANEAT IIS of: 

Sloka 90.—If the entire rim of the Moon’s orb 
should first begin to clear leaving intense darkness in the 
middle portion, it is called aergtm—Antyadarana, The 
central country will suffer ruin as also the autumnal 
crops. 


Adh. V. Sl. 91-95] ss Tanitsvara: 73 


aut @ BSaq: 
wad fared eradt avd agr way | 
acaeaqarara: wera fasata 


Wa Al Alal AMea ATeHesTY fHecaz | 


gal fea afi aa ae zat Tra BEAT AH 
Sloka 91.—All these (10) kinds of liberations which 
have been declared for the Moon’s eclipse should be 
deemed to apply to solar eclipses as well, the only differ- 
ence being that wherever the East is referred to for the 
Moon, West should be substituted for the Sun. Simi- 
larly for the other pairs of quarters. 


Ih aaeIa? THAME T Sed | 
ata Ths RET TATESY WSR 
Sea Aaa AAT TAT WARTS | 


mf eA N 


Mad WAIT fF erqraieaitaiery Az 

gag wagiet aeqrat qa % aaa 

Bal ays TAS ACATEY qT TA NVI 

fata: CIT qvey gaa TI aAT | 

WEIS FYE HAA Ata Ares! 14M 

Miprasatrria aqera: Bheaqiesay | 

WU TENS Tat AA_Talag SR 

Slokas 92-96 —If within 7 days after the termination 

of an eclipse there should arise a dust storm in the land, 
it will cause famine ; if there be heavy dew, there will 
be outbreak of diseases; if there be an earthquake the 
death of an important king will happen; if there be the fall 
of a meteor, it portends the destruction of a minister. If 
there should be clouds, of various colours there would be 


very great fear in men’s minds. If there be thunder, 
q. a. 10 , 


74 PCC UID § FAdh. ¥. SI. 97 


Sar Deneeieaasiniemmel 


it will cause mis-carriages, If there be lightning, there 
will be trouble from kings, serpents, etc. If there be 
Parivesha, there will be trouble from diseases. If there be 
false fires, there will be danger from kings and risk from 
fires. If there be fierce and stormy wind, it will engender 
fear from thieves. If there be portentous thunder, Indra’s 
bow or an impact of the Sun’s rays with the cloud helped 
by the wind, people will suffer from hunger and there will 
be the risk of the country being overrun by a foreign king. 
If there be planetary war, there will be war between kings. 
If Ketu be visible, the same effect will happen. If there 
be clear shower within these 7 days, there will be prospe- 
rity and peace in the land, and any thing untoward due to 
the eclipse will be warded off completely. 


amt @ aaadiearara | 
TVITAA A Ma AT TAT YTSTT A: | 
aagraa yar aenhrsar yar se: 0 


aa A TTT: | 
wVgrgayge Tagrairay | 
qtgagisaarn: aietedl wagzTea u 
TITANIA WH sear aharaqay | 
wrara Was: Urwaaarsaagya: tl 
faagufrarara reeaersaages | 
faqaegag esr gaara wary aN 
TIA; TAS! SAAUTIZITAS: | 
aazaara: Wrazvayg waaay a 
UAgata she VeRTENgAHA | 
‘ava ase qal afeasa qargag i 


ame fsa wena we Hae Tes | 
Sara amat area 1190911 


Adh. V. Sl. 98. VI-1.)  wetseara: 75. 


Sloka 97.—If after a lunar eclipse there should hap- 
pen a solar one at the end of the fortnight, the effect will 
be that people will become wicked and unjust in their 
behaviour and there will be disharmony among couples. 


HET Taal Tet ae Taz aay fas: | 
SRHTHsAIM Aaled Beats ANAT ici! 


Sloka 98.—If a lunar eclipse happens at the next 
fortnight after a solar one, the Brahmins will perform 
many sacrifices and be blessed thereby and the entire 
population will be happy and contented. 


When a solar or lunar eclipse occurs, persons at whose birth 
the Moon occupied the same sign as at the eclipse, should perform 
expiatory ceremonies in order to ward off any calamities that 
may befall them or their families. These are explained in detail 
in Adhyaya 67 of the aca@zwt-Mathsya Purana. They generally 
relate to the worship of the lords of the eight quarters headed by 
Indra in four earthen pots filled with herbs, mud, gems, etc. repre- 
senting the four oceans, and of Brahmins with the presents of 
cows and clothes. 

Thus ends the fifth Adhyaya on the ‘course of Rahu’. 


Waa WS) Mars. 


VICI Bl ATAATAAT | 
TRTAGMGTS HeracaRaaaany 


Sloka 1.—Note the asterism occupied by Mars at 
the time he emerges after his last conjunction with the 
Sun, If he should begin his retrograde motion when he'is 
passing the 7th, 8th or Oth star reckoned from the aforesaid 
asterism, it is called weaget-Vaktramushna. People eking 
their livelihood through working on fire will suffer thereby: 


76 | geeatternra  [Adh. VI. St. 2-3 


Cie CULE 

sary aaa Salees aTasi ar | 
fat sitar ager awagera i 
awsRadtiadt 4 = cata a agita a | 
TIUTMA ara wearer Wasa: 0 


SIICTNBCTATA SA HASATAT | 
RICE CICCOR SUCRE rica MIS] 


Bloka 2,—If the retrograde motion of Mars referred 
to'above commence at the 12th, the 10th or the 11th 
asterism reckoned from the star occupied by Mars at the 
time of his last emergence from the Sun’s conjunction, 
itis known as Asrumukha. The different kinds of tastes 
will be vitiated and diseases and drought -will break out 
when he reappears after his next conjunction with the 
Sun. 

al A Tarn: 

waaeram asl great ast ate | 

Sear AI BA TeTAAYS 4 az ti 

aa aaa tsteqr wafirear gary cara | 

o Fer yraeegy qt ayy Tat YT | 

weal saraa: Het sera ATT | 

agit: sORaat sts: setaa u 

SUG TACAAAIAST ISTISTAT | 

apeqeaiva: Hite det atig a3 

Sloka 3.—When the .retrograde motion alluded to 

begins while Mars:transits the 13th or the ‘14th asterism, 
it i8:known‘as‘tats ‘Vyala and lapses after Mars is :next 
eclipsed. People -will :suffer from creatures having sharp 
teeth, serpents and other reptiles and .wild animals. 
Therewwill:-however be general-prosperity. 


Adb. VI, $1. 4-5] AUtsvatas 77 


au @ ait: | 

TNT ST TAA aly ante Vga | 

fagd ger Taagest sareygeay ii 

VaeA TAU SATSTAsa HSA a2q | 

qrouagy feaaaaesPrarttete 1 

GAT ST TUT: 

AATUTAZRUTAT: AATesats wazeq ewadad a 
etrraraala wet agar rear Pfr | 
AHS FAUT sat =z alaaqraefa ivi 

Sloka 4.--When Mars emerges from his ‘last conjunc- 

tion with the Sun and begins ,his retrograde motion at the 
15th or the 16th asterism reckoned from the one occupied 
by him at the time of his eclipse, it is known as etwuaw- 
Rudhiranana. During this period, people will suffer from 
facial diseases and there will be general panic. There 
will however be prosperity. 

aut @ wT: 

aly vazae 3 aga wedslt art 

frat get ewarcertararay 

dtieaen: olwara wala olepar azfir 

MARIA FANT FAUT Wares Ft 


AAT Bs ATA: 
TIANA BZAUM FIT: TAHT Ut 
AAAS AATTAVTTTASHT A ATTA | 
aegnura: ghet aerate aaqaaTy UM 
Sloka 6.—-When the retrograde motion: begins at.the 
17th or the 18th star counted from the one occupied by 
Mars at his conjunction with the Sun, itis knqwn as 
wufégae-Asimusala, When Mars begins his direct motion 
after this, there will be trouble from bands of .robbers, 
drought and risk from weapons. 


78 gqeetigarary [Adh. VI. Sl. 6-7 


aut a wt; 

AAUSATN ar atikary fafa | 

fataugue aa ages qitariiag tt 

Wadd wWeqarewd F TAA: | 

sritat wad giea aa WeTaewAA: I 

aUal ST GUAT: 

SAGASAAR A TAIN: ssaMgqraAge weary 4 Ul 
araraneal ae aaa aagaa Ara: | 
maresataatat sratateaia kt 

Sloka 6.—If Mars should emerge from the Sun in 

Purvaphalguni or Uttaraphalguni, begin his retrograde 
motion in Uttarashadha and disappear in Rohini, he will 
afflict the three worlds with miseries. 

TM A GUA: 


HEPPUBT FAT Ie UTIs | 
QIAGa Nara weled ax Tera wv 


AUNTS TH I TENarailersy | 
afaagsegiqamesqary Tay eT 191i 


Sloka 7.—If the emergence of Mars from the Sun’s 
conjunction be in the asterism Sravana and he begins his 
retrograde motion in Pushya, kings will suffer. People 
belonging to the countries denoted by the asterism through 
which Mars reappears will meet with destruction. 

For the asterisms denoting countries vide ch. XIV, infra. 

Ul ST WAIT: 

afta: wadt‘sta: ga as deat | 

qaifateer carat agg: Tea 

aur cargo fatann: sarkte: | 

ae & ata gaiaiikenyaa Wey 


Adh, VI.SI. 8-12]  eatsvara: 99 
aeineanans, Danaea EneneneneneemenemenneenenemnnnEmEnmee mee 


aeqa ae Aqat Tad Sika: BAA gar | 
qeat wi Masala waarmee: lici 
Sloka 8.—If Mars should pass through the middle of 
the asterism Magha and retrograde from there alone, the 
Pandya king will meet with his end, and people will 
suffer from drought and war. 
eat aat Marat fez Ara: waa shia | 
AH BET ME AS Hea Teel ay si 
Sloka 9.—If Mars after cutting the asterism Magha 
should cut Visakha, there will be famine in the country, 
If he should cut the star Rohini, there will be terrible 
mortality in the land. 
cara Uae | 
qaUay arat a tea WRaTeMTz 1211 
Sloka 10.—When Mars passes through the southern 
side of Rohini, kings will suffer, prices will fall and there 
will be little rain. If he appears surrounded by smoke or 
flame, people living in the Pariyatra region will be 
destroyed. 
mae Aart 7s Ag stg aie | 
ay Ta TTTATAITTKE TeTTT (22 
Sloka 11.—If Mars ‘should transit Rohini, Sravana, 
Moola, Uttaraphalguni, Uttarashadha, Uttarabhadra or 
Jyeshta, he will spoil the thick clouds (Nimbus) that have 
been formed, and there will be no rain. 
WUTA AIR: TTA 
CHITA AMIITIAY T SAT 122 
Sloka 12—If Mars should emerge from the Sun's 
conjunction when he is passing ‘the asterisms Sravana, 


80, geedQattta [Adh. VI. Sl: 13. VIFI 


Maghs, Punarvaéu, Hasta, Moola, Ptrvabhadra, Aswini, 
Visakha and Rohini, he will ptove auspicious (and the 
evil effects mentioned before will not happen). 


fgetaaqht: fgertreath 

HCH TAT TATA ATTA ATA: | 

fracia aft art ara afata: 
qapeatat aees aay 83" 


Sloka 13.—When Mars with a broad and clear form 
and deep-red like the Kimsuka and Asoka flowers. with 
pure and bright rays, with a brightness like that of red-hot 
molten copper should pass in thé northern side of the 
asterism he is in, he will bring on prosperity to the kings 
and peace and contentment to the subjects. 

aut @ ai: 

araatgaaed aaat aigary | 

wmianaward g atag arigqeaa 

ACMA MATa F TANT AMAT | 

Areaani Rad Wa: AIAN IsNs: | 

WAH AVIHST AFA J Was: STA: Il 

Thus ends the sixth Adhyaya on the ‘course of Mars’. 


TAA 91! Mercury: 


aerate: BUA VAT AAT AY | 
AVCEATIAMTBSMATTATS 1121 
Sloka 1.—Mercury never reappears after his con- 
junction with the Sun without any unusual phenomenon, 
He will cause some sort of trouble through water, fire or 
wind, thus threatening people and causing emuaor ayy 
rise or fall in the prices of food grains. 


Adh. VII. Sl, 2-4] —- @aaitssara: 81 


ama aaraditaram 
saa aie aiirgqar areareanatarsta: Sarfaahy | 
qauRagisewqal aeassaeaaHal ti 
aut GT FAN: 
aad ger at ad ae a nesie | 
wa a gee fa aaa afaetan: 
aut @ Bsqq: 
wTealtaia ata fate aras: | 
waamargardateraratkey: 
“~ (an SS 
Aa TTA AIIITTea AeA | 
War ARCMAAT: HIE TTA (12 
Sloka 2.—When Mercury transits through the as- 
terism Sravana, Dhanishta, Rohini, Mrigasira and Uttara- 
shadha, there will be no rain and diseases will break out. 
aul @Z BIqQ: | 
‘iso Gaga a ahqawaaraanry | 
quaisia war ela sar trie crea u 
Ualalia AAA TUA TAA TAT | 
ValrqTaggacaragNsaenss Ut 
Sloka 8.—When Mercury is passing through any of 
the five asterisms commencing from Ardra, people will 
suffer on account of clash of arms, hunger, fear, disease, 
drought and worries. 
aul GT SFA: | 
wares Ter var meraOtegeareA: | 
fata wagtacanGt: Hewat ag ti 
eealia BUY TENA IsIy TANATA: | 
AAAS BUS all mA vit 
Sloka 4.—During Mercury's transit over the six stars 


reckoned from Hasta, cattle will suffer; oil, ghee, etc. 
qa. 11 


82 qeateararg ~ «=[Adh; VII. Sl. 5-7: 


honey, jaggery and the like will ris2 in price ; but there 
will be plenty of food-crops. 
aul Qa Ssyq: 
Eada ary aa aeraitegaeza: | 
TAAYAS: Wee: qa: 
AT age ATIIga TA 3 | 
TRA Gal finaq moat aT U4 
Sloka 5—If Mercury in his transit should cut through 
the stars Uttaraphalguni, Krittika, Uttarabhadrapada and 
Bharani, all creatures will be afflicted with diseases caused, 
by the seven constituent elements of the body, viz, 
muscle, bone, blood, skin, semen, fat and marrow. 


aw QA AZT: | 

VWMiHsseqswaaega A BAT: | 

aiarataaary simrat itera: u 
APTANA ayTIAT dt a WTA: | 
TUATHA SSTTTATT (1 Ut 


Sloka 6.—When Mercury passes through the stars 
Aswini, Satabhishak, Moola and Revati, the trading class 
physicians, sailors, substances derived from water such 
as pearls and conchs, and horses will suffer destruction. 

aut Q SAT: | 

tadt arent qwatadt arwasaz | 

ga amtanaey aaraia waraaq u 

queaaaenytiest: Gaia | 
AVSAICHUATAAIAA ALY ATA (191 

Sloka 7.—When Mercury cuts through Purvaphal- 

guni, Purvashadha or Purvabhadra, people will suffer 


from hunger ; war will break out, and there will be danger 
from thieves and diseases. 


Adh. VI. Sl. 811]: . aaatsears: &3 


qalaa avy areay HE Heat aig ATT 
qrecmaeataa: sila sciaat Taz 0 
MPAA MAA SAA STAM KITTITAS: | 
Ad WATT TAA? BAT TAA MI! 

Sloka 8.—In Parasara’s Tantra, the following seven 
courses (or gaits) have been declared for Mercury as 
distinguished by the several asterisms: (1) Prakrita (2) 
Vimisra (°) Sankshipta (4) Theekshna (5) Yogantha 
(6) Ghora and (7) Papakhya. 

WHATS TWASTATETIATATA AEST | 
feat aid: weer aaRraaganzana 

oo @ ¢ € r~ 
aia rt 98: gaia: Tapeict aia | 
atemrat Axes TAHATR Tey Noll 
TnieaHa YS Fase ais: Taerai: | 

° Ae ° 

il TITRA AGRA TEU Bq NLU 
qareat alad wat wariacad Ae | 

Slokas 9-114 —The course is known as Prakrita 
when Mercury passes through any of the asterisms Swati, 
Bharani, Rohini and Krittika. It is termed Misra when 
he transits any of the stars Mrigasira, Ardra, Magha and 
Aslesha. The gait is called Sankshipta when Mercury 
travels through Pushya, Punarvasu, Purvaphalguni and 
Uttara phalguni. The course is Theekshna when he 
moves through Purvabhadra, Uttarabhadra, Jyeshta 
Aswini and Revati. It is Yoganta when Mercury passes 
over Moola, Purvashadha or Uttarashadha. If the 
transit be through the stars Sravana, Chittra, Dhanishta 
and Satabhishak, it is called Ghora. Lastly, it is called 


Papakhya when his passage is over the stars Hasta, 
Anuradha and Visakha. 


84 geeiteram [Adh, VII. Si. 12-13 


STAMTMATAA I VI TaAsIAT wes ULM 
aatiag aq fara Faas 3 | 
Aq Wale TY AHATA AHarMAay 123! 
Slokas 12-13,—The measures in days for the rising 
and setting of Mercury in his seven courses are 40, 30, 
22,18, 9, 15 and 11 days respectively. 
aut a goa: 
aaeqetHarat Taramera Fa: | 
aeus fafaarat qifiearaadh i 
wat givaia ata afeama weaa | 
aerenre dtenrat arate ga a ti 
qrarat qredtaia aera fash | 
AANATAATYTAATS TERA TAT il 
aveiat 4 Cah: MAA ATTA: | 
BMS: A YI anqearssaiin: 4 
Tal A SAT: 
aeqiaaat treats gta fata: | 
aVITMSAG FIs Vegans |! 
aq A MHA aaaeqizaeeanr | 
BB wa: waar fasaifa fafaaa: ov 
But the above is not approved by Varahamihira for he has said 
as follows in the aaraatear. 
orga rare wager TTA TTT ea: 
Taw sanarat adqaieeg: ese wars 
CT TATA Brat @ agar aa arzarg | 
fae afi: afirtrarqanitgzaaars: y 
algar ala Wat: GaIg: Geyaes Ysa: t 
alent UATE AATATEA Sauer, 
qSerge ara ae want @ qeareg | 
qrarear g faut wed aa ae writes u 


Adh. VIL Sl. 14-16] a@aatsvara: 85 


MHAUMAARVATLCAAIIST IAT | 
airatarataaageag atiay eV 
Sloka 14.—In the Prakrita course of Mercury, the 
people will command good health; there will be suffi- 
cient rain, good crops and general happiness. In the 
Sankshipta and Misra courses, the effect will be mixed ; 
and it will be reverse in the other courses. 
aU A Ta: | 
AAACN SAM MHA Wea: | 
atag a fafa a yargwaereg ti 
aigo Gat @ Aa! a aur aleniaarsT | 
Uaaaa: ATA TIAARASHOT: Ut 
ascattam tat Reet a ada Sawada: | 
TATA RE MSSM TFTA kel | 
Sloka 15.—According to Devala’s view, the effects 
of %sdi-direct, sidae—exceedingly retro-grade, am'— 
retrograde and fawwr-decayed motions of Mercury wilt 
last for (9x6=) 30, (4x6=) 24, (2x6=) 12, and 
(1 x 6=) 6 days. 


Beal Tear aaaataay waaaata | 


VAAIC F Tar (AHS AaUTASrAal 2a 

Sloka 16.—Mercury when his motion is =f or 
direct does good to the people, while his over retregrade 
motion brings on famine by destroying the wealth 
(of the country). When he is retrograde in his motion 
he will bring on war in the land; and when his motion 
is decayed or weak ; he engenders fear and disease. ¢- 

TU Taw: | 

reat tageafeteaty « ata: | 

Reet a: at Mya awrat asrisott uv 


SO gqeeaieaay” [Adh. VII. SI, 17-48 


i geen REE NE O eA AN 


aqiamigarag afy fate ats: 1 
wldam Maga TAansea u 
Metis ZIZM AM ZarMIwBasiZa: | 
ae! Tia: a1 ar aaaqIaAAaE aT i 
agiqaia var eeRa: Graacaa: | 
Boe | Nagar WavMaaryar i 
waaay aa Tat diawEA ZI ~ 
WAM Barat Bi eT FWAAA 0 
RUTEMTAATA ET: TTT | 
Cal HUT ANA TARSHMMAAT Vl 
Sloka 17.—If Mercury be visible in the months of 
Pausha, Ashadha, Sravana, Visakha and Magha, he 
will cause fear and panic inthe land. But if he should 
be eclipsed by the Sun during these months, he would 
produce good effect. 
aa a Tani: 
AMATIATTY AATTIUTTATY | 
a g3aa ga: wal alasarag Ey7a Nl 
FaStgay Cs: MIAEVaY AA Vea 
vat traraaraly etver aie frgara a 
GUE A WTA: | 
aMaasarala GeawTanaeaar | 
Sai T WWsa TY Baa WaMiaag ti 
Ve aie awe AT ala aur a waa: | 
Aaa AAATSAINS san a Thay tl 
Ritasaga at ale aa ead agua: Aaetar: | 
TSM EIMIMNA aR F At Arata iirc 
Sloka 18.—If Mercury be visible in the months of 


Kartika and Aswayuja, there will be risk of war, danger 
from thieves, fire, diseases, water and hunger. 


84; 


eye — 


Adh, VII. Sl}. 19-20.VIII-1] aeatssara: 


SEA AEASATS FN AeqAd Weqraied Haq |” 
Hey g waged aged wry gent waatia aegee ULSI! 
Sloka 19.—When Mercury is eclipsed, towns will 
be besieged and when he emerges out from the Sun, the 
siege over these towns will be raised. According to 
another view, there will occur the retaking possession of 
these towns only when Mercury is seen in the west. 
aal a qeat | 
GH Siza GET VAT FWwTTE: | 
ga: argiea ala gate ratarzag a 
qHENeAAT BRIT AHA AAT AEA aT | 
Raraqhieyga fara saa a YaRrsfyga Roi 
Sloka 20.— When Mercury is of golden hue or of 
parrot colour or resembles the colour of the Sasyaka 
(saphire ‘) gem, or if his disc be glossy and big in size, 
he will prove beneficial to the people ; if he be otherwise, - 
he will prove malefic. 
TA A TTA: | 
PAASABAITHSHIA: TANT gia tl 


Thus ends the seventh Adhyaya on the ‘course of Mercury’. 


Tara: | cil Jupiter. 


AIAN Aeleqgansaa wa Faqhracat | 
TST THEI TT BraHANT II? 1! 
Sloka I1—Note the asterism occupied by Jupiter 


when he emerges out from his conjunction with the Sun. 
The name of that star has to be given ito the year, and 


BB | qeedftararg = [Adh. VIII. SI. 2 


the sueceeding years will bear the names of the months 
in their regular order. 

aU SI RIGA TE 

WAiga AAA aE wa Taua | 

aaa: a areaaaaas: ti 

AUT AWA Bisq: 

qaeat gh Va wears ska: Ga: | 

qaaaey Harweasy aad fae u 

Taaqriaasat salayueaaefa wa awiqawmanvaaa 

Raa at a RATA aE | 

fasarfe a ga steataenSacraa: | 

qeeqaeg areaiea ag gaTalssa 

. Safa aaa g sararqaaarst¥a: 1 

AMRARAC ATA AETASY WA 

aa @ Wi: 

Tara BEAN Aleat waaay | 

TRLSSIGATa TUCST: WATT 

gua graasaria aa att geeqa: | 

OA THaragesat araasa Meas 

qaqa wa wat Va geeaia: | 

Barat Awad GAasTaAshasu 

TV HlaHlaeaaageasaaie | 
SUMNGA I WaAgIeaae FATA URI 

Sloka 2—The years commence from Kartika and 
are composed of two asterisms each beginning with 
Krittika and follow in regular order. But the 5th, the 
llth and the 12th year comprise each three asterisms. 

aa a TW: 


qieqat wa ge a RAY qeeaia: | 
@ RaTassy: BC Welragacat avz tl 


Adh. VIII. Sl. 3-4] MEATSAT: 89 


ro on a ee a 9 WA AO 


arqoratia ait avafe gerqta: | 
AA ATA GISsz: WAAATAAA AAT I 
qaide seve argaraaa a | 
Ties sla Way avaur seawt fF we: ti 
Midd wea wed a avails geeqa: | 
caAT: GSAS UKAAZAaras: tl 
aAqa AMA Tizizsanaat: | 
BaUeaaitaawa: Gaaerzaiesat: y 
Ul A BAIA: | 
eliiaatezaar wart fgaaaiaantean | 
faa wes HA Heya strat ae i 
mn ba l~ + 
VHEASITTHAG ST SAAT ART | 
afar THaaHRaAA BH TT UU 
Sloka 8. —In the I[artika year, cartmen, those 
living by fire and cows suffer. Diseases will crop up and 
there will be war. Red and yellow flowers will grow in 
large quantities. 
aul a aaa: | 
FVAB: TYWAE: YTSANAwAIAZ: | 
TrMnseerist a aliaaagesz: 
A ANN om bas) 
MFASsqsHTPsMg*aysrvsdiy Aaqqq: | 
Saad May yorat wad Fe eh 
Sloka 4.—In the Margasira year of Jupiter, there 
will be drought. The crops will be affected by wild 
animals, rats, locusts and birds. There will be outbreak 
of diseases, and kings will have dissensions even with 
their friends. 
aut a wl: 
aterar sated fat Aer: | 
UBUTMNSS: aed eMerawsres: i 
qa. 12 


90 geaigaraa. =f Adh. VIII. S), 5-7. 


UAHA TW Haare: wert fataa: | 
EDU ICICARUCESTCRICICE MICE 
Stoka 5.—The Pausha year of Jupiter will prove 
auspicious toall. Kings will leave their enmity and will 
become mutually friendly. There will be a rise* in the 
price of corn by 200 or 200 per cent. Preservative work 
will increase. 
*According to the Commentator, a fall. 
at A TT: | 
TAFASATAI AAT SA WM AAEHT: | 
AASANAIIA: TE: Taragway: it 


Ratagat ata argarary | 
ARTS Tear MATA NGI 
Sloka 6.—In the Magha year of Jupiter, people will 
be interested in the worship of their Manes; and there 
will be a general feeling of satisfaction among all the 
creatures. Genera! health will be good and there will 
be timely rains. The crops will be plenty and there will 
be good sales. Friendship among men will be on the 
increase. 
TU A Wit: 
Bmniis giaw a aio rake z | 
gst: Tagqeg ArT UAT a aeaqa: 
Bley Mega HAAT TT | 
AAA TAAL MASA TIVATT: (hoi 
Sloka 7.—In the Phalguna year of Jupiter, happiness 
will prevail only here and there ; so also will be the case 
with regard to rain and the crops. Young women will 
suffer ill luck ; thieves will enormously increase and kings 
will become cruel and severe. 


Adh. VIII. Si. 8-10. ] agatseara: 91 


TIT A MT: | 
AMAARIHAT. Heya: TATA: | 
arate Qrat a ahyzaraeee: i 
St Wear aes Prawa Aaqaaqt wea: | 
digg Biaeaerey val Gist a STAT Ne! 
Sloka 8.—In the Chaitra year of Jupiter, the rains 
will be slight. Food will become costly ; people will be 
happy and kings will be kind-hearted. Pulses will thrive. 
Handsome persons will suffer. 
GUT SW: | 
BAIT Usa: Hana TA a | 
ait @ weal VATa AA BT 
x L%y lon an 
TA ARTA ATAAa: Aglean AA ATT: | 
aaa: ATAATALT 1S I 
Sloka 9.—In the Vaisakha year of Jupiter, people 
will be intent on doing virtuous deeds, will be devoid of 
fear and will be happy along with their kings. People 
will be engaged in performing sacrifices and other rites 
and there will be abundance of all kinds of crops. 
AA ST WT: | 
gaa: Wa area aha Sale arisan: | 
ama J aaaeq seq: ataaita fF u 
Pain “~ Nn .y 
Say TTagTITT AMAT FU: ATA: | 
~ “~ ~ o n 
qietedq Mega FT Tear ae TANT Noll 
Sloka 10.—In the Jyeshta year of Jupiter, people 
who are prominent by birth (or caste), family, opulence 
and trade, kings and men of righteous conduct will come 


to grief. So also will the crops except Kangu and those 
of the Samee class. 
aaisift is another reading for aatsrfaa. 


92 qeaigarary [Adh. VIII. Sl. 11-13 


aat A Wit: | 
AATSASA AU AAT aaAAA: | 
RUAAATTN SI syTUTEART | 
ATE Tat Ta BATE | 
AMAT BEF SAH waeT TTI 18 VII 
Sloka 11.—In the Ashadha year of Jupiter, there 
will be crops here and there and no rain in other places. 
The luck and happiness (of people) will only be medium, 
Kings will begin to be extremely active. 
AAT A Ta: | 
SIMAMAAMATA USisraleTTHT | 
QUSITCATA AeaAAAPIE: | 


AMANTT AT AFITS eA TeRTTaAMNed | 
Bx A Nave: weed Fy ARM U2 
Sloka 12.—In the Sravana year of Jupiter, there 
will be general happiness and the produce of lands will be 
plentiful. Heretics and base-minded men alone with 
their followers will suffer, 
TAC A TM: | 
ATA: AMAA: Aaiwase: ia: | 
ara aadat aia asaaquiy aaa: i 
Sad Weve: aay anwiaraqag | 
ba ins oe Can sf ° 
MIS TSE et ans wag 3 | 
TWIN AS Haga Ka aa_ 1230 
Sloka 13.—In the Bhadrapada year of Jupiter, the 
yield of creepers (such as green grams) and the first crop 
will reach their fruition. There will be no second crop in 
the year. Food grains will be plenty only in some 
places. There will be panic or fear in other parts. 


Adh. VIII. Sl. 14-18]  sreaitseara: 93 


aut VQ TT | 
MNEMAAATA AAI FAT I 
Sila SV SMAA BATAABH: Ul 
HAAsSssag Tala As agate wat AAT | 
ATTA MTYAt AIA ATI_eaT M2 Vil 
Sloka 14.—In the Aswayuja year of Jupiter, there 
will be frequent rain; people will be happy and con- 
tented. All living beings will grow strong and food will 
be in plenty for all. 
al A FATT: | 
qaaaraateaaaagsa: fra: | 
GesTMeaa: ward AIBAGAAT: ti 
VEANVAQMAAAKA ASUAATT ATTY | 
ara asqtiat RETA T ASTRSATAT U4 
Sloka 15.—Jupiter while in his northern course 
confers health, happiness and plenty ; this will be reverse 


in his southerly course. When he is in the middle, he 
will produce mixed effects. 


Ay ATAACAAIE TACT AETHS: | 

aaa Feat Fase ai Haq ure 

Sloka 16.—Jupiter is beneficent when he transits 
two asterisms in the course of the year. The effect will 
be medium when he passes through 24 lunar mansions. 
If he should perchance go through more than this, he 
would destroy all the crops. 

AABAITASTT SQrigy: Ws TTA: Tay | 

oN “ ra ia’ 

alta A AeHTTs Tisl Th TF VAAIT 11291 

qarismiaeiagag zara at ee | 

LTSSAS Tar Tal 2 THAT WIM ci 


94 geeaiearanry [Adh. VIII. Sl], 19 


Slokas 17-18.—If Jupiter has the colour of fire, there 
will be risk from fire; if the colour be yellow, diseases 
will break out ; if it be dark, a battle will be impending ; 
if it be green, there will be danger from thieves; 
if it be red, there will be trouble from weapons; if it be 
smoky, tucre will be drought, lf Jupiter be visible in the 
day, there will be regicide. If his disc appear big and 
clear at night and he be posited in an auspicious lunar 
mansion, the whole world will be happy. 

In Sloka 18, Jaf? is another reading for War 

AAT SA TUT: 

Raaaa gaa far Fayginsa: | 

wat ar inaa aaa sat at fazala ul 

Wis AsqTSy FW GeATAMALATTUNSTy 
ay eaaderd 4 Gad As? Ba a Taq! 
at muaeasratedt aah wa aa 

JF YSRSATMSY ETA AAA AA TI 123i 

Sioka 19.—The asterisms Krittika and Rohini consti- 
tute the body of the @azawgea-Samvatsarapurusha ; the 
two Ashadhas (Purva and Uttara) form the navel; 
Aslesha, the heart ; and Magha, the flower. When these 
lunar mansions are devoid of malefics, the effect will be 
auspicious, If the body be afflicted by malefics through 
conjunction or aspect, there would be danger from fire 
and wind. If the navel be afflicted, there will be risk 
from famine. If the flower be afflicted roots and fruits 
would be destroyed. When the heart is afflicted, there 


will ‘be the inevitable destruction of crops. 
qa A EIZaq: 


wHiwer Wigot aw aaaqagq: ezar | 
asad att ad BsSqa Aa 


Adh. VIII. Sl. 20.-22] ateatseara: 95 


RAeA FF Thaarawarear: | 

Sai gf wanes Fr qenway: tl 

ETA GATiA: ARATE WE: aaAvaar | 
aay Tin THERRAIgINA SeTOATN: | 
aTeIaTe Talia Heal AAT IPeT TATA: Noll 
Bsa FH THYIRIS aay Gar favaifasa | 
AUN ACANTAHTT BST WI: ATs TAs TAs UA 


Slokas 20-21.—Find out the number of years that 
have elapsed since the commencement of the Salivahana 
era. Multiply this by 44. Add 8589 to the product and 
divide the result by 3750. To the quotient thus obtained, 
add the Saka years. Divide this by 60 and the remain- 
der thereof by 5. The quotient represents the five-year- 
periods ruled by Vishnu and others, and the remainder 
denotes the number of years that have elapsed in the 


particular lustrum. 


CHRIST AUCA TAL TAITITAH HAT | 
Ea Vaaaeaaareaga atwRaAsTy Ul 
Sloka 22,—Place the years of Jupiter obtained in the 

previous Sloka separately in two places, Multiply the 
first by 9 and divide the other by 12. Add the above 
product (in the first case) and the quotient (in the second 
case). Divide the resuit by 4. The quotient will reveal 
the particular asterism reckoned from Dhanishta. The 
remainder will denote the Padas (ata) in the next star 
that have been traversed by Jupiter. 


In a Mahayuga (the period comprising the four Yugas), 


the number of solar years is 4320000 =3750 * 1152 * 4370640 
That of Jupiter for the same period is as per Surya 
4370688* =3794%1152 Siddhanta. 


96 TRA AT AT [Adh. VIII. Sl. 22 


So that for every 3750 solar years we have 3794 years of Jupiter. 


Therefore 1 solar year=1+->—— years of Jupiter. 


44 
3750 

To find out the number of Jupiter years that had elapsed (in 
Naliyuga) at the time of the commencement of the Salivahana era, 


we have to proceed thus: 


The number of solar years that have passed from the beginning 


of Kaliyuga till the commencement of the Saka era is 3179, This 


379+ 1126 


d int ill be 57> Ores 
converted into Jupiter years will be 3750 * 3179 or 3216 57 3750 


Now it is known that Kaliyuga commenced in the year Vijaya 
(the 27th year from Prabhava, which is the first year in a cycle of 
60 years of Jupiter). 


1126 _ 
Therefore, 3216 3750) + 26 or 3242 ae being divided by 60, 


the remainder will give the particular year of Jupiter (in his cycle of 
60 years) from Prabhava at a of commencement of the Saka 


1] oe 
era, and this remainder is 2 > D eihieli is the 3rd year or the year 


oo 
Sukla of the cycle. 


Coming down to the period subsequent to the commencement of 
the Saka era, say the present time ( qAala 2e-Vartamana Saka 
1868 April 1945), the number . Jupiter years that have elapsed 

44 X 1867 


126 
will be 1867 + 3750 2 ae =o from the beginning of Prabhava 


3398 1126 774 beets dha 
or 1867 + 21 3750 + 2 375() or 189] 3750 which indicates that it 


is the 32nd year of the cycle or Vilambi. But actually, it is 
Hemalamba. The reason is that the figures for Jupiter’s years as 
given by Aryabhatta or as per Surya-siddhanta are a bit more than 
that of Varahamihira. His figure 8589 appearing in Sloka 20 is 
different from 8626 that we got above. Calculating backwards 
from 8589, we find the number of sideria] revolutions of Jupiter 
according to Varahamihira to be 364190000. This is probably the. 
correct figure. 


Sloka 22 gives a clue to find out the particular lunar mansion 
in which Jupiter may happen to be at any given time. 


Adh, VIII. Si. 23-24] aesiseaa 97 


Taking the current Saka year 1868, we have the Saka years that 
have elapsed as 1867. The number of Jupiter years that have elapsed 
as calculated in the penultimate paragraph'of page 96 will be 


1891 ay This when divided by 60 gives a quotient 31. 


As per Sloka 22, wehave to multiply the above quotient 31 by 
9; then we get 279; and by dividing the same quotient by 12 


we get 2 Adding these two figures we get 28155. Dividing 


this result by 4 we get 70 and odd, thus indicating the asterism 
traversed by Jupiter, as the 17th. This when reckoned from 
Dhanishta is Uttaraphalguni. 


ey: qrsat TahigaarTaei awaBIaaT | 
BMA: Pa aTHASeMAAM: ATT URAL 


Sloka 23.—The lords of the 12 Yugas or five-year 
periods in the Jupiter's cycle are respectively (1) Vishnu 
(2) Brihaspati (3) Indra (4) Agni (5) Twashta (one 
of the creators) (6) Ahirbudhnya (7) the Manes 
(8) Viswedeva (9) the Moon (10) Indragni (11) the 
two Aswins and (12) Bhaga. 


aa FY aqaraaisaray t 

PAOPSAIBTA PRATISTEATs aa 

al n~ e o . 
SFIaa Aware, NAAT WATT Ft 


aacaishe: aftacatish santa: ataaqaarat | 
AATUAAM TAIT BNezeat: Asgaratiay ileell 


Sloka 24.—The names of the five years with their 
lords of each lustrum are (1) Samvatsara and Agni 
(2) Parivatsara and the Sun (3) Idavatsara and the 


Moon (4) Anuvatsara and Prajapati and (5) Idvatsara 
and Rudra. 


a 13 


98 geeaiearary [Adh. VIII. Si. 25-20 


ee ee RR ee Es noes ee ed 


aie: ame age Raia vyaaia Brat zaia | 
IAS FAA TAIT BeNsh IAASTTH RII 
Sloka 25.—In the first year, the rains will be even, 
while in the second; there will be good rain in the initial 
portion of the season. In the third year, it will be plenti- 
ful, while in the fourth, there will be rain only in the 
Jatter half. In the fifth year, the rain will be scanty. 


aearht geana gueTaa Aozegatnasczang | 
FEAT AeA | ASIA Tea qaqa eagle 
Sloka 26.—Of the 12 Yugas comprising the Jovial 
cycle, the four, vzz., Vishnu, Indra, Brinispati and Agni 
are the best. The middle four are only inedium. The 
last four are to be understood as the worst. 
aa a anradiearany 
mane gurearat gaia aeaia aeaaG oie | 
aeataraia 4 ataatia qaaaiss 
Ng aagtqaaagay Wy AW AKYTA GisT | 
q bat lo 
qeseqTas AAT AF AA ATA Waletaaisg: [Rol! 
Sloka 27.—When Jupiter enters the first quarter of 
Dhanishta synchronous with his emergence from the 
conjunction of the Sun in the month of Magha, Prabhava, 
the first year of his cycle begins and it will be beneficial 
to all beings. 


mira: carat: aediaa BsaHay tat: | 
wars WAT ATA A TIAAIAa TaTIMTT URI 
Sloka 28.—In this year, viz., Prabhava, there will 


be drought in some parts; there will be outbreak of 
storms and fires, the six-fold troubles (vide p. 61. supra), 


Adh. VIII. Sl. 29-33] weatseara: 99 
and phlegmatic diseases. In spite of these, the people 
will not feel miserable. 


Targeds fraa: age: YRegdla: qa: Tare: | 
ANA CS of tA A 
mariage AMA AAA TUT BaleTATMY udu 
PC HMC CICK COTE DICE RIC CHIE RE @ 
qeeaial HSH AA Tat Alea a YaaAT loll 
Slokas 29-30.—Thereafter, Vibhava, the second year 
begins. Then follow Sukla, Pramoda and Prajapati. 
The benefic effects will go on increasing in these 
years. During this period, Kshatriya kings will rule over 
the earth abounding in paddy, sugar-cane, barley and 
other grains,) when the people will be free from fear and 


hatred, and where the pzople will be all-cheerful and free 
from the malefic effects of the Kali age. 


aaiste: aigeaaaarl gar qarala aa fata t 
CA ~ Cal lan i 

TUM GIT FaHAT Towy gel GA Ge FUL 
Aeaaargy Raat sal fauaeaaay Sia | 
AeEZASHMUTT AA GIS! Hecay Tas TATITAT (122i 

Slokas 31-32.—In the second Yuga which is com- 
posed of Angiras, Srimukha, Bhava, Yuva and Dhatu, 
the first three prove auspicious, the remaining two being 
middiing. The lord of rain will pour down abundant 
rain in the first three years and the people will be free 


from affliction and fear. In the last two years, the rains 


will be equally distributed, but'there will be the outbreak 
of diseases and war. 


Te at TaaITs §9 Bald TTT | 
aaa Reacaqeag? = Reag waa ITA 1Z3N 


100 geeargarara, ={Adh. VIII. Sl. 34-37 
ara taht Ua FT as HATH Fea Waray | 
UI TAM TAMA FT AAAs WeaTAIAAT AF NA 
Slokas 83-84.—In the third lustrum presided over by 
Indra, the years are Easwara, Bahudhanya, Pramatthin, 
Vikrama and Vrisha caused the transit of Jupiter. The 
first two years will be auspicious and will bestow the 
fruits of the golden age on the people. The third will be 
wholly inauspicious and the last two will give plenty of 
food-grains and risk from diseases. 


e ¢ g nr ¢ (on 
US WI ye Wa aaaralg Hraied TI | 
qey sala gq Gulaaes MIs BR a aa B41 
aT agg yates waalegied = w74q | 
Gay sqagaled Wad AeAyIMIA_eaTHST USE 
Slokas 35-86.—In the fourth Justrum, the first 
year, viz., Chitrabhanu is declared to be the best, the 
second, named Subhanu is medium in result ; it brings 
on sickness without mortality. The next year known as 
Tharana gives copious rain. The year Parthiva is dec- 
Jared to yield luxuriant crops.) The fifth year, namely 
Vyaya, will prove auspicious. Love reigns supreme and 
festivities will be the order of the day. 

The commentator Bhattotpala adopts the reading 4q *7 instead 
of 4 74 in Sloka 35, and interprets Hato be the name of the third 
year instead of Tharana. In the next sloka, he adopts Tharana as 
the fourth omitting Parthiva. Accordingly he adopts the reading 
gremiaaaaz. This is not convincing as it is against our tradition 
AE Tit aaaay Te: Taeaisea: Bs agar | 
quate ga: Ger Te eiaise wars Far: B11 

Sloka 37,—In the fifth lustrum presided over by eaet- 
Thwashta, Sarvajit is the first year. The next is 


Adh. VIII. Sl. 38-42] sgatsvara: 101 


Sarvadhari, followed by Virodhin, Vikrita and Khara. 
Of the above, the second year is good and the rest bring 
about dread. 


aecaisy TaN TAA AERTS WIA Tar 

CAAT TT AMIGA AAAs TARSUSTAISTE Ril 
Sloka 88.--The sixth lustrum consists of the years 

Nandana, Vijaya, Jaya, Manmatha and Durmukha, The 


first three are propitious ; Manmatha is middling. The 
last will prove the worst of the lot. 


zaseq eft qa aM alfeates Tat frat a | 
Can “ ba 
Vala Tags TAs TAA AAT WoTMAT TIA Ril 
Sfaaral AATIaIAal sews I TT 
qed Aa a TEaSS Teatsat fata | 
AIS Wass: Aradarqai 
iar Ba {a Ta TAA Yass vel 
Slokas 39-40.—The seventh lustrum is composed of 
the years Hemalamba, Vilambi, Vikari, Sarvari and 
Plava due to the transit of Jupiter. The first year will have 
stormy rain accompanied by the six-fold afflictions (vide 
Adhyaya V-52, swpra). Inthe next year, the crops and 
rains will be scanty. The third year will prove very 


disastrous through floods, and the fourth will usher in 


famine. The last year Plava will prove auspicious with 
copious rain. 


ay at aragtasa: gacadisa: FaHsecha: | 
arat Tatas Wa: RAT aragaia weray le 2 
WT atte aware alae ageraaiseae | 

WU TA Beg WTI TeTAsetAT | eel 


cd 


102 geeaisaraag =[Adh. VIII. Sl. 43-47 


a ay Ne RE SY PE ey NTE echt ARE eR Eh sree yore? 


Slokas 41-42.—In the 8th lustrum ruled by Viswe- 
deva the years are Sobhakrit (also Sokahrit), Subhakrit> 
Krodhi, Viswavasu and Parabhava. The first two bring 
joy and contentment to people. The third will prove 
very malefic. The last two will be middling. But in the 
fifth year Parabhava, there will be fire, affliction caused 
by war and diseases; and the Brahmins and kine will 
suffer. 

AEF is another reading for Waza. 

HT? FIR! ATA Bassa: Brewionseas way area: | 
AAA TAHISMIAST: YAITT HaHa TATA V3 
HS: YAIR TEM AAT ATseg Taya | 

G2 WAN VaHiaqeaaqa Is aT a Taare lie 

Slokas 43-44.—In the ninth lustrum, the respective 
years are Plavanga, Keelaka, Saumya, Sadharana and 
Rodhakrit. Of these, Keelaka and Saumya are good, 
while Plavanga will prove troublesome in muiny ways 
to the people. In the year Sadharanx, there will not 
be much rain and there will be the six-fold afflictions. In 


the fifth year, the rain will be unequally distributed, but 
crops will flourish. 


zegaad TIA Bt Tamsad aWeswisasaza | 
WANAMAGAI: W Aq AR AITAsasaT F lvl 
ahaa aereaatal Tretia AeA AN: | 
AGA AA AANTAST TAL THBETT arg lve 
FAL: ARB HATAl WAT: ATHUSAB AAT | 
MTIMAMATIST WIAA TRTATHIAZISAS: | Voll 


Slokas 45-47—In the tenth Yuga presided over 
by Indragni, the first year is known as Paridhavi; then fol- 


Adh. VIII. SI. 48-51] svwaitsvare: 103 


\ 
low the four years Pramadi, Ananda, Rakshasa and Anala” 
In the year Paridhavi, the middle country will suffer, and 
a king will die. There will be dearth of water and 
trouble from fire. In the year, Pramadi, people will be 
lazy ; there will be war, and red flowers and red seeds will 
be destroyed. The next year Ananda will bring joy to 
all. Whe two years Rakshasa and Anala will produce 
a general decay ; the former will be marked by the growth 
of summer cropsyand the latter by the outbreak of fires 
and epidemics. 

Saad AN ATAT is another reading (in Sloka 45), In Sloka 
47, 1gha: is another reading for qéTi: 


ba on C a“ 
CHE PTRBTMAINA BZ TAA | 
x ~¢ nN aN * 
HT IT WSATA ASNT All STRIITI_ Bra: livell 
e “ NON GC oN 
THOT ATABTG ASAT TI TTT | 
Vasiag: AaHorUTel a FAlaMeTeHea: (VA 
Slokas 48-49.—The eleventh Yuga is composed of 
the years Pingala, Kalayukta, Siddhartha, Raudra and 
Durmati. In the first year, there will be excessive rain. 
Kobbers will increase. People will suffer from Asthma, 
cough, followed by the shaking of the jaws. The year 
Kalayukta has got many defects and evils, while the year 
Siddhartha contains many good qualities. In the year 
Raudra, there will be much suffering and loss. The year 
Durmati will have medium rain. 


wea Qi Baasqae aaa as vedt Bela | 
VRINGAST AegZ Bara acquit gat a gE: llhoil 
Hans, HI sats ay wa <ikad az | 
Ml TEAMTTRL AAT TENT Bratged Ara: Wl 


104 ameifeatata [(Adh. VIII. Sl. 52-53 


Slokas 50-51.—In the twelfth Yuga, the first year is 
named Dundubhi and will be marked by the growth of 
plenty of food grains. ) Then follows Udgari or Rudhirod- 
gari,)wherein kings will suffer and(the rains also will be 
uneven and irregular, ) The third year is Raktaksha in 
which there will be general danger caused by tusked 
animals and diseases. In the fourth year Krodha, people 
will become subjected to anger and kingdoms will be 
devastated through wars, 


In Sloka 50, H#1< is another reading for Same. 
| 


ANA FAFVTAKA TAIT 
saute wa aeaat aqiaeawsar | 
saat Aegznt qwaga a1 
Haas Wrst TATA AAA 42 


Sloka 52.—Kshaya is the name given to the last 
year of the 12th or last Yuga of Jupiter. It will cause 
decay in many ways to the people, engender a sort of 
fear among the Brahmin class. The agriculturists will 
prosper. The Vaisyas and the Sudras will gain ; so also 
the robbers. Thus have been declared here briefly all 
the effects arising from the 60 years. 

aa A qarauic¢aary | 

dR qdange Reraastia wah F at 

farsa gn ada agiara ace avy | 

a& gaianga gaargata area | 

asa fFataag Yarae ayaa g 

. ara guitegrt adtrad aairgaa t 

ana saa Fy qwuszas aes: T 


wagigates: Tyqt: gaTEcagaTeHlesre: | 
WEA A A aeqaadl Raarsacyedsarary UA 


Adh. IX. SI. 1-2] WARISEATA: 105 


Sloka 58.— Jupiter, with rays unbedimmed, dense 
and spread over all round with a form broad and white as 
Kumuda and Kunda flowers and clear as crystal and not 
overpowered by any other planet and on the march in the 
right direction will prove beneficial to the whole mankind. 


Thus ends the 8th Adhyaya on the “ course of Jupiter”. 


Uma? Sil Venus. 


% 
AMAATATITAMAA TAMUACTALTAT: | 
TATA: HANTAL RaITTS BAT eA 
Sloka 1.—It has been stated (by Devala and others) 
that there are nine roads viz., (1) att Naga (2) wa-Gaja 
(3) &waa-Airavata (4) ZIa-Vrishabha (5) w-Go (6) atxa- 
Jaradgava (7) #4#-Mriga (8) a#-Aja and (9) ¢¢a-Dahana 
formed respectively by the nine triads of stars reckoned 
from Aswini and ascribed to Venus. 
GYl BS Tas; | 
AA AAA:: Gal ALTA! SAG. | 
qiwat Wayae aa wre: YeTea: U 
AMT A Bsa: 
sqhaeqieg gar uela Ware: | 
ainda ar Hae qaarrear ara uv 
VSIA RarsizQwawaal VLA | 
AUT PIC Aat geaian ar: Taasar a 
WUa Mage Waray WesAwasd | 
AAA MMA SMA J TAT VAT Ul 


TM FT WaWMeWAstia Gaia Bara: | 
WANVA Aes Tso F ATT aI 12! 
z.a. 14 


106 sera eararg [Adh. IX. Sl, 3-4. 


Sloka 2.-But according to our view, the Naga road is 
the course of Venus over the three asterisms Swati, Bharani 
and Krittika and those of the Gaja, Airavata & Vrishabha 
are composed of the succeeding three triads, viz. (1) 
Rohini, Mrigasira and Ardra (2) Punarvasu, Pushya and 
Aslesha and (3) Magha, Purvaphalguni and Uttaraphal- 
guni. The four stars composing the Go-Veethee are 
Aswini, Revati, Purvabhadra and Uttarabhadra. 


TST TIT Ha Dares Pray Hara | 
SAAT ARALMIAAUNSA TAT UU 


Sloka 3.—The road # z4--Jaradgavec consists of the 
three asterisms Sravana, Dhinishta and Satabhisha. 
That named #a-Mriga sways over Anuradha, Jyestha 
and Moola. The three asterisms Hasta, Visakha and 
Chittra constitute the wwarat-Ajaveethee. The aeaara- 
Dahana Veethee consists of the two stars Purvashadha 
and Uttarashadha. 


aaa HUST OT UTTA AT: | 
aaa Saa aa aaa NY | 


Sloka 4.—Of the above nine courses, the first three, 
viz. at@-Naga, wa-Gaja and taa-Airavatha are 
northern, the next 'three are central and the last ones, 
southern. In each trio, there is u further sub-division 
into (1) northern (2) central and (3) southern. 

aut a ay: 

FAK UCN Vrgt ATA TRATATT | 

- RMA BaMaN Waar: ti 
atgearariren a mdgrefta vata | 

1 maottaa Sar eit arvzaita ar ut 
Paha waren azcaaaiwaraer | 


Adh. IX. S]. 5-6] AaqatSvaTG: 107 


aaaa g cea qregrafafa ear u 

garde anrdrat asatadt aga | 

HUA AA AFA CARLA: STAT: I 
argat J aqul engiaiat qaat azar | 
et aazal Sar aa Beaansrar: 
aun gaat arent aarear | 

gear wadt Sar afer ariaifiran: 

ay a aRTadigaaray | 

freaft ara aret waaaeot a awer Var | 
euasyaraa: WATseawasy TIT | 
CHTMSATS TW: WISITaL AA wana | 
Farad Bsa cava arar a i 

% was geal faa sazaiaa: RAAvaT: | 
HEA ALANA ULEVl: ATT WINATAM: tl 


aidiaimagt eaata aqierary aaTe | 


AAA AT WET AASTATATT UN 
Sloka 5,—It has been declared by other sages that 


just as there are the three courses in the starry firmament, 
even so, the asterisms have their positions defined as 
northern, central and southern according to their situation 
in respect of the ecliptic. Similarly, if Venus transits 
north of a star, he is said to be in his northerly course, 


etc, 


aA A BRAG: 
AMA AA Hate SIAM ALASAAT: | 
THRMACH: Aisi West BsaAl GTA: i 
ater seat anit aarag salsa: | 
ATAAAT: Aeaaiedt we Teas I 
glam aero arat ace aeq eft era: | 
BUA Aeans Fast qeqaca aware: | 


A AA © 


SAN AMTSTENS BACT HAT Alas USM 


108 gew@izatatmy = [Adh. IX. SI. 7-8. 


Sloka 6.—There are others (like Garga) who say 
that the nine asterisms from Bharani onwards constitute 
the northern course, while the central one is formed by 
the nine asterisms beginning from Purvaphaleuni and 
the southern one is composed of the nine stars counted 
from Purvashadha. 

aM BTU | 

AATVANTTAFASMSS ATH TW | 

AGATA: GAT AR TAT TY TIT | 

ant aaagaed BITalar ATS TIT | 

aadaraa Aeqert aeaa wy aaa tl 

UWA AFA BT TatA Aas Tat | 

qaara: But AA Fat Wa ada ui 

AA eA A SS “ 
SANGHA AMAIA A ATTA TATRT | 
aaad Faedad Pied agat Ad TET [sil 

Sloka 7.—The science of astrology cum astronomy 
was founded on the intuition of great saints. Should there 
be any difference in their views, it would not be proper 


on our part to suggest the correct course. [lence I can 
only quote various opinions. 


saa Ua: grataaHAASATTa aT | 
ATTN TARTS? TEKS! TAN llc 
Sloka 8.—Venus, setting or rising in the northern 
routes will produce abundant food-grains and prosperity 
to people. When he is in the central routes, he will 
produce middling effects ; while in the southern ones, the 
effects will be untoward. 
aut a aa: | 
SEAUNAAT Pal-AMZAANAA: | 
give a gee a area (aiaigerg ti 


Adh. IX. Sl. 9-13. ] 9 #aarseara: 109 


SIMAAA HAVER HTAaa: | 
ARIA WTI a ainara fataveara 
SITMay Hara Awana: | 
WiFIa GSE TAT wang faery Faq il 
AACN AAALATATTARCRST | 
Hit Area Ty saw say UA 
Sloka 9.—The course of Venus in the three routes 
am, a and &waa will produce effects par excellence, 
excellent and slightly good. Similarly the effects have 
to be pronounced to be even, middling and slightly bad, 
when Venus traverses the next three routes. In the last 
three routes, he wili produce effects which will prove 
undesirable, disastrous and totally,destructive respectively. 
nan ¢ ¢ ~. 
HUNT Wess aqdss GAARA | 
THFAUSTINSHRMSRAY AIAATT 12 ol 
AMRAMTET TeSTA AWS ea aat searg 
SEE CUICUCTAICCECMC MEET 
Slokas 10-11.—The four asterisms commencing 
from Bharani constitute the first Mandala or cycle of 
Venus and produce plenty of food. But, there will be 


fright in the countries Vanga, Anga, Mahisha, Valheeka 
and Kalinga. 

If after the rising of Venus in this a%™@-Mandala 
another planet should pass over him, the latter will destroy 


the kings of the tribes Bhadraswa, Surasena, Yaudheya 
and Kotivarsha. 


WII Halaaargaaarsss | 
ATTA QaRE Tas ATASTATT URAM 
AMAUHA FRB ATABAT AMAA | 
amedtsaary Wetaaras eas 2a 


110 geeaiearary = [Adh. IX. S]. 14-17. 


EAS RR ANT ee TS LEG SS RASS eterna AS GY rey fst sg nse ne VAP rE 


Sloka 12-13. The four stars beginning from Ardra 
form the second #*8e or cycle and Venus, while in this, 
will bestow plenty of water and food-crops. But he will 
be unfavourable to the Brahmin class, especially so to 
those that commit cruel deeds. If Venus is overpowered 
in this “s¢z-Mandala by another planet, he will cause 
distress to the Mlechchas, foresters eaters of dog’s flesh 
and cowherds, the people of Gonarda, low-class people, 
Sudras and the people of Videha. 


AAT AINesHgIga: TAMAR A: | 
TAMIA AAA ATSB U2! 
fiarsagsey zewaead atary waa | 
PeUeaylsnraaMagasagany 24! 
Slokas 14-15,—When Venus after rising is passing 
through the 3rd atg# formed by the five stars com- 
mencing from Magha, he will destroy crops, cause 


danzer from famine and robbers, revolutionise the social 
levels and create comminvling of the social str ita. 


If Venus is assailed by another planet in this cycle, 
he destroys shepherds, Sabaras, Sudras, Pundras, savages 
of the western countries, the Sulikas, foresters, the 
Dravidas and people living on the coasts. 

6 ~ e iy 
Sag aaa WeaqaaqqaaraTcy | 
AAATAAAMISA HAA VEU 
same weg: fatiana: Fae Vearaq | 
. wardaragseragary Waata iol 
Slokas 16-17.—The three stars commencing from 


Swati form the fourth Mandala which removes fear from 
people’s minds, promotes the happiness of Brahmins and 


Adh, IX. SI. 18-21.] AaAAISE ITA: 111 


Kshatriyas, and the growth of-crops, but creates mis- 
understanding among friends. If Venus be overpowered 
(by another planet) in this Mandala, death overtakes the 
Kirata-chieftain, and the Ikshvakus will be crushed. So 
also will be the cave-men, people of Avanti, Pulindas, 
Tanganas and Surasenas. 


SIRI WIA AACHTINS TAT | 
HRAACAARAAY AalSsdlarediy uel 
yanies Tasers ATaaTerz | 
agate faeqaaicata sratara qa 291 


Slokas 18-19.—The five asterisms beginning with 
Jyeshta constitute the fifth avgs. Herein, the people 
will suffer from hunger, robbers and diseases. Similarly 
the people of Kashmira, Asmaka, Matsya, Avanti and 
those living on the banks of the Charudevi will be in 
distress. If Venus be overpowered here, he destroys 
the Dravidas, Abheeras, Ambashtas, Trizarthas and 
Saurashtras, people of Sindhu and the Sauveerakas. The 
king of Kasi will meet with his end. 


WS Wags BAdaeqvss waqgiag | 
Wtaatigagaaaerqed HATATZ 10} 
AMV Bisa tieqesaeaa tse | 
AN AN A 
TQ eTTs AMATTTATRTIAMITS: Ul 
Slokas 20-21.—The sixth Mandala which is auspi- 
cious is composed of six asterisms beginning with 
Dhanishta. The period will be marked by an increase 
of prosperity, cattle-wealth and food-grains ; but in some 


Places there will be fear. If Venus be assailed here, he 
will cause distress to the Sulikas, people of Gandhara and 


112 geatgatara [Adh. IX. S]. 22-24 
Se ha a eee 


Avanti ; people of Videha will be destroyed ; cave men, 
Yavanas, Sakas and servants will thrive. 3 
aaat qa sag alt Wes Yaz | 

fame great Aarity aarR HST NR 
Sloka 22,—Venus in passing through the fourth and 
the fifth Mandalas in the west will confer benefits on the 
people. Similar will be the result when he transits the 
third division in the east. The effects of his transits i 
the other Mandalas wil! be as already stated. 
AM A TWA: | 
AAU CAMO AU AA CATSASMeAaa WAIST | 
aM A Aaaaeaay 
AUVUCRATASTBNAVaAITAY | 
ae: BR wssy facqeanGsare u 
at ot ~ 
TELSTRA ISS WAHT AAAHPAAAAT: | 
~N ~ ~ 
ASIETA A AeGITTTSIJTACHeGM: Qi 
Sloka 23.—If Venus be visible before Sunset, he 
will crus? fear ; if seen throughout the day, there will be 
hunger and disease. At midday if he is seen conjoined 
with the Moon, there will be discord between the king's 
troops and the citizens. 
Mal A TUT: 
HE: AT AA Bat Ce7asT ACA: | 
aa alNeqiaalat aeara ATT AW 
Reey gists Raovaweawitaaas | 
HAHAFAR AAT aBATa sat lvl 
Sloka 24.—If Venus passes through the middle of 
Krittika, the earth consistiny of elevations and depres- 
sions becomes levelled up »by the rivers through waters 
overflowing the banks 


Adh. IX. Si. 25-27] aaaitsvara: 113 


mae ane aq HAI TTR agar | 
HURITHOMIS BATSAT AT TA Ul 


Sloka 25.— When the cart of Rohini is broken 
through by Venus, the earth will be strewn with hair and 
pieces of bones and assume the form of one who per- 
forms the #rqewaa-Kapalavrata to atone for the murder of 
a Brahmin. 

Here the author has indulged in a bit of poetic fancy. The 


idea is that many will be killed in battle, etc. 
For aqeadt Vide aaqezia X1-72 


The wain of Rohini is cleft, 7.¢., undergoes occultation 
by a planet, when the latter, standing in the 17th degree of 
Taurus hus a southern latitude (i444) of a little more than two 
degrees. 

AU A AATAleg | 
faatcisaiFaarsraal TWA AATAATT | 
qa Dee great aaa ape a UeVgT: 
aM YT BiIgveE: 
TIAA ATTA AAG wear se M: | 
AU gayee AeA AreIaT: WHE FA tt 
“ ~*~ 
ANIMA TAA: Aes: | 
C ~ os ~ ~ : 
AMAT BAGHOASl ASoATHTAT: REM 


Sloka 26,—When Venus comes to Mrigasiras, he 
will destroy juices and crops. When he goes to Ardra, 
he causes ruin to the Kosala and Kalinga countries and 
brings on excessive rain. 


THR gatger a aeTaTas: | 
g8y gsr aidearaewp tay N21) 


Sloka 27.—- When Venus is in Punarvasu, the 
Asmakas and the Vaidarbhas will be put to much suf- 
q.@ 15 


114 ara@iarmgq [Adh. EX. Sl. 28-29 


fering, When he is in Pushya, there will be copious rain 
and the Vidyadharas will be crushed in battie. 


ASUS YARATVTUNSAATY BA: | 
OCMC URC IEAL CIAL CICt SEMIECAL 


Sloka 28.—When he is in Aslesha, the people will 
undergo immense suffering caused by snake-poison. 
When he is piercing Magha, he will ciuse trouble to the 
chief of Mahouts. There will be copious rain. 

‘To the chief Msnister’” if the reading aziHa@ be adopted. 

Utpala gives in a quotation the definition of the cleaving, 
alias occultation, of the junction star of Magha by a planet: 

NeSAan WHAT | 

sizaia amant arargiarasrarary, | 

CHANT TIES Was BATILT: 1 

The definition of the occultation of the star in question 
according to the scientific astronomers, is as follows: “A planet 
occults the junction star of Magha (Regulus) when its own 
rectified latitude, being in the same direction {north’, is more 
than half the latitude, and less than one and a half the latitude 
of the star’? From this we may deduce that the author of the 
stanza, whoever he may have been (probably Brahmagupta), had 
a still more accurate knowledge of the real latitude of Regulus 
than the Surya Siddhanta has, in which the latitude is st:ted to 
be O. Another stanza defines the latitude of tte Moon when 
causing the occultation of certain stars : 

faaisea G4 aadiaatt Gar. igsaT | 

eretaaty gee qreor arenrafatard: tl Kern. 

WY TAT See aAAHUSAAASACAT | 
MAT FETNFSUBSA TWSsTat URI 


Sloka 29.—When Vengs is in Purvaphalguni, the 
Sabaras and the Pulindas will meet with destruction ; 


Adh. IX. Sj. 30-33] = aaaiseara: 115 


a 


there will be copious rain. When he is in Uttaraphalguni, 
the Kurus, people of Jangala and the Panchalas will be 
destroyed ; but there will be rain. 
mitaraaaaat ga Ger Asa a AT! 
HIRSVSAST FATT AAT TBs Noll 
Sloka 80.—When Venus is in Hasta, the Kauravas 
and artists will suffer. There will be drought, 


Diggers of wells and birds will suffer when Venus is in 
Chittra; but there will be good rain. 


aa MpeTeeaaiaay TIT! | 
Wega GUSITay @ wa ara sei 
Slaka 31. When Venus ‘is in Swati, there will be 
copious rain, Messengers, traders and sailors will suffer. 
If Venus be in Visakha, there will be dread among the 
traders. 


A oN ON 
aa gala Sagat argeaaeany: | 
DA ~ : . A AD ~ 
HeR MIT Ye Preah qasqaras: Rl 
Sloka 33-+When Venus is in Anuradha, there will 
be dissensions among Kshatriyas. When he is in Jyeshta, 
there will be trouble to the Kshatriya chiefs. When 
Venus is in Moola, druggists and physicians will be 
worried. In mone of these three, there will be rain. 


AY ASVariey BAA savas: WACATeT | 

TIT AUPSITY: qateqy wage 123K 
Sloka 83.—When Venus is in Purvashadha, people 
will be troubled by aquatic animals and products (aquatic 


animals will suffer, according to some). When he is in 
Uttarashadha, there will be a crop of diseases. When he 


116 geeaigarara =[Adh. IX. Sl. 34-35 
is in Sravana, there will be ear-disease, and when he is 
in Dhanishta, there will be danger to heretics. 


Vas Mhsaaassy aaa seryq | 
SUA Saas aula away Ma afeaq Ren 
Sloka 84,—When Venus is in Satabhishak, distillers 
of toddy or jarrack will be distressed. When he is in 


Purvabhadra, gamblers wili come to grief. The IJurus 
and Panchalas also will suffer. But there will be rain. 
Mees Haqenipanaa a teary | 
qigeat eaqat wea gq Pauavaaiay i341! 

Sloka 35.—In Uttarabhadra, Venus causes damage 
to fruits and roots ; in Revati, to travellers and marchers; 
in Aswini, to horse-keepers ; and in Bharani, to I|tratas 
and Yavanas. 

Tal A BST: | 

Wea Fitat ga sears fagara t 

WHEAT BT AT WHIPSVABPSA I! 

wig adaarat at EAA: Aa: | 

agg @ sepa aastat wzarag: 0 

gaadar faquiont dreaeqaral erate 

4 Ge AaAraiea Aa: Aaa TA: i 

MUTI NZIS IZTA: VAT: | 

ATA: BR Beraraia Tsay a 

wig aaasada agg’ aga | 

Haw F FWAA Treyatarwarwz i 

sa faqs gq der aivadt WaT 

Gale STH Paraz aer aT wi 

Wate Tqe a afinansaeciag: | 

faurarat qgie a aa fra Recaka ow 

Gre Inara: aeqe g Mant aaq | 


Adh. IX. Sl. 36-37] aaatseara: 117 
Mey SIT sgrgag Ana BraTAr ti 
MAT FELLA ASA MiTseaTsay | 
WISUs Gaamaegea Hoea7: tl 
aiaat aga a qed wa wewIag | 


~ £e 


aiaeal SadrsHRIAA HRASTIATH UI 
AIA TATA aurea aaaTaE AY avait: aa: | 
Al AHMAR AA Al Al Azl TAMA Bead N38 


Stoka 56.—When Venus b:coma2s visible or sets on 
the 14th, 15thor the 8th day of the dark fortnight, the 
earth will appear as if it were mide of water, 2.e., there 
will be abundant rain. 

aU A BIZ: 

BUCH DAA UATZIeAy F | 

Seq via: Hara Ve Tyla u 

UaCaaA aaITawE | 

alae F aa ala HeaAsaqazar | 

aaret aafa grt sal ayia a aa 

aaAVA AI BR HAH Zseria: t 

Sala F Ag Tawi Gat aaa ary |! 

ANT F YRA BT aegisarsi | 


MAMA HAA AB FA ATTA: i 


AAs W rary aly aaa waa: | 
algaanal sam Greaiaa aaa Ul 
RITA BTA We ATATAT aT | 
al AM WAIT Asat a aly weated Geeta tl 
Sloka 3/7—-If Venus and Jupiter be in exact opposis 
tion, and in the East and West (lst and 7th), the people 


will be oppressed with sickness, fear and grief and will not 
receive even a drop of water from heaven. 


118 geengatara [Adh. IX. Sl. 38-39 


T aaeeeelicalicideneemememnenes dibneeienedem mma 


aut a 

SRWUCAAACT! | Bal PRITTTAT | 

qaaeealael Mat wawat ag waz Wi 

RAGIN 4 WATS Ada weaagaasar i aur are | 

Featqatal VA Fiera Treat: | 

aa Bias Ava Fal aictay ezaa Ni 

CTHAMAITA! TAA WEITZ ! 

a at Nisa Rea ata qaraaiara u 

aM BW weArEeY Wea 

MAY WHA: Bs: TAA Feeaia: | 

qaiseqiea fatiaa ag Ab Wada 

WAHAB GCUFA TA SIGE: | 

TWN AaA_AMNT sa: BRAT AA 

Ree wa Wi TH a sar VAT | 

Wspa TF Wey west: wrage Ha: uy 

Fat J TSA: WR: Waa Beers: 

qar qrereaat ai alada Ge wad 

aut a aT: | 

APGAAMACAL F ALT BRITET 7 

qrareqniar ae aayat wewaA 
qa Raartagaaaan ae aisaraiaqaa: | 
TAMA RUAT Alea AWA aASaeTH ec 
a faarara eet canta: ara aeagq wan fea: 
aq WeTAvyty eaifa aaa Mara asm eta para 

Slokas 38-39—When Jupiter, Mercury, Mars and 
Saturn are in advance of Venus, there will be wars among 
men, elephants (or serpents), demi-gods ; and winds will 
destroy the tops of mountains, trees, etc. Friends will 
not continue as such; Brahmins will neglect their religious 
duties. There will not bea drop of rain from above; 
and thunderbolt will destroy the peaks of mountains. 


Adh. 1X. SI. 40-43]  aaatsvara: 119 
eee co ek ee 


AAA FSVSASISFAM: GU mA TATA | 


VsecTTA alana: aa AR-MUAACTAKA? llVol 
Sloka 40.—When Saturn is in advance of Venus, 
barbarians, cats, clephants, donkeys, she-buffaloes, black- 
grains, boars, Pulindas, Sudras and people living in 
southern countries will be destroyed by diseases arising 
from the vitiation of wind, and by ophthalmic diseases. 


AN | 


faatea ae: fafaasaa: WaT RMIT ATTA 
quat sTHAMAUIa asta A Wsag N82 


Sloka 41.—When Mars is in advance of Venus, 
people will suffer destruction through fire, war, famine, 
drought and robbers. Both the moveable and immove- 
able objects will be completely annihilated; So will be 
the people in the northern countries The quarters will 
be afflicted with fire, lightning and dust. 


ageadi afta gutea Ga: 4 aaa BarTgusarg | 
fea aT Tal BTRITRSETT TS TI YR WAT TNT I 
Sloka 42.—When Jupiter is in advance of Venus, all 
white objects, the abodes of Brahmins, cows and Gods, 
and the eistern direction will suffer ruin, Clouds will 


shower hail-stones. Discases of the throat will prevail ; 
but the autumnal crop will be abundant. 


ATSRTIAS FT AIUTATIAS: 
ADIDMCRISCAR ICE Men cy genta q ants | 

ei Tra aA ae RIAA ITSH HANA aay 

Aa A aE aeaataalg aa qaeag Nes 


Stoka 48.—-When Venus is behind Mercury at résing 
or setting, there will be rain. Diseases wil crop up és. 


120 gmafearaia [Adh. IX. SI. 44-45 


pecially those arising from the vitiation of bile, and 
jaundice. The summer crops will flourish. Ascetics, 
fire-worshippers, physicians, actors, wrestlers, etc., horses» 
merchants, cows, vehicles, kings, all yellowish objects 
and the western direction will be ruined. 
aaa TERIA Th 
“ AN A bal 
HARARE SITAAl SATS | 
CRABGSST AAHATHT: 
Tad 4 ass BIRMSINaATa llvell 
Sloka 44.—When Venus is of the colour of fire, 
there is danger from fire; if red, there will be war ; 
if golden, diseases will break out; if green or tawny, 
asthma and ‘cough will prevail; and if ashy, coarse or 
dark in appearance, not a drop of water will fall from 
heaven. 
STRUTT MIS HeTINHTABTNCKTM TAT: | 
TTUAAGN TANT: FAIFTSTRE PATA: Ue 
Sloka 45.—When Venus is of the colour of curd, 
lotus (Kumuda), or the Moon, with rays bright and far- 
expanding, with an orb full and larve, with a good gait 
4. @., not retrograde, and going north of the star, not 
accompanied by portents, and victorious in planetary war, 
he bestows the semblance of the golden age. 
aa a-HaHwAay: Rava areal TAATA: | 
wmaal eganSa qararaet: ta: -gitt 
mgt sm: mivat fate eaatseq as Gale aa 
wea a alt HeI TT A ag waa az yi 
ait MITA: SVt Bt AS Bara Tz 1 
Wey FLY Wel PI A ag aad a7 ii 
Thus ends the 9th Adhyaya on “ the course of Venus.” 


Adh, X. Si. 1-4.] SRM AISEIT: 121 


+ 


AACA: 2ell Saturn. 


ATNUABEMIAL ACMTAVAGA yatsnea | 
AAAS BIVSt Hla si als Para: ue 
ATAVTGVATATT GAIGA AIasy | 
Asawa Fo TBAT Tea URI 


Slokas 1-2.—When Saturn being of glossy orb stays 
in Sravana, Swati, Hasta, Ardra, Bharani and Purva- 
phalguni, he makes the earth filled with plenty of waiter. 
When he staysin Aslesha, Satabhishak and Jyeshta, he 
bestows happiness on mankind. But thcre will not be 
plentiful rain. When he stays in Moola, he brings about 
famine, war and drought. Now, I shali treat of the 
effects of Saturn in each lunar :nansion separately. 


AMT ANT | 
FFAAUAEAANAAUNZ AANTSAA: | 
wag favqag: anit awe Bansaya: 
ararenaigeraaag @ aera: | 
Raa: aig: Was aah sata u 
qr sage qs qaga: aartea: ugia— 
SN And es 
CMA TAS RATT AS HASTA | 
— =f ar 

qty AAA HNARAR AHAB RV 

Sloka 3.—When Saturn passes through Aswini, be 


astroys horses, grooms, poets, physicians and ministers ; 


4 


while in Bharani, he ;destroys dancers, songsters, musi. 
cians, base and deceitful men. 


TZWS Geter aseqabta aq | 


Wat Rasaarswarnen: Wel 
q.a. 16 


122 geaigarara, [Adh. X. Sl. 5-7. 


Sloka 4.—When Saturn moves in Krittika, people 
living by fire (such as smiths) and commandants suffer, 
while in Rohini, the people of Kosala, Madra, Kasi, 
Panchala and cartmen will suffer distress. 


AMAT AAAARATATATATATTATAT | 
UR TWITASTASRTAR ANT UM 


Sloka 5.—When Saturn is in Mrigasira, the Vatsas, 
the persons performing and those officiating as priests in 
sacrifices, the nobility, and the men of central countries 
will be troubled, while, in Ardra, the Paratas, the Rama- 
thas, oil-mongers, washermen and robbers will suffer. 


MA UAT AUT TANT: | 
Gsy qtzaqinaraaitaaggatia gy 
Sloka 6.—When Saturn is in Punarvasu, people of 
the Punjab, the western tracts, Surashtra, Sindhu and 
Suveera will suffer ; while in Pushya, bell-ringers pro- 
claimers, Yavanas, traders, gamblers and flowers wil 
come to grief. 
co oA re 
ay Waeag: (sa aslealaaean: | 
USHUAIA: BIST TATA [911 


Sloka 7.—'When Saturn is in Aslesha, aquatic 
animals or products and serpents will have trouble. In 
Magha, Saturn causes trouble to the Bahleekas, Chinese, 
Kandaharis, Sulikas, Paratas, Vaisyas, godowns and 
traders, 

at a ma: | 

BAFSVWOSIWMASATAAAVITTT | 

SUZVQarasaan alaaa ll 


Adh. X. SI. 8-12] SMASLATA: 123 


wea TattRlaT: TTR THATS | 
ALAR TTTSH AAA ETA TAMAS Uc 
Sloka 8.—When Saturn is in Purvaphalguni, juice- 
vendors, courtezans, virgins and the Maharashtras will 
have trouble. In Uttaraphalguni, Saturn afflicts kings, 
Jaggery, salt, mendicants, water and the people of 
Taxila. 
ee ataametniarsatra Ramer | 
TAIT? HATH ASK Wea AI 
Sloka 9.—When Saturn is in Hasta, barbers, potters, 
wil-mongers, etc., thieves, physicians, tailors, elephant- 
catchers, harlots, people of Kosala, and makers of 
garlands will come to grief. 
Pare saqasanhrataTaret | 
aN 
Mal AMTTATTACAT ATTA 112 oI 
Sloka 10.— When Saturn is in  Chittra, young 
women, writers, painters and coloured pots will suffer. 
Saturn in Swati will afflict the Magadhas, (or the royal 
panegyrists), spies, couriers, charioteers, sailors and 
cancers and the like. 
oe NA Coa San) 6 
UKNATVY ATCA AR GIFSHA GAT | 
TAleAQ AAs Hgara Tas aria ween 
Sloka 11.—When Saturn is in Visakha, the Trigartas, 
Chincse, people of Kuluta, saffron, lac, crops, madder 
and. saiflower come to decay. 
HA FLIIFUAACK A: AMAT RAT: | 
STAT Atiea | area Aye Herr uel 
Sloka 12.—When Saturn is in Anuradha, the Kulu- 
tas, Thanganas, the mountain tribes called Khasas, 


124 geearcarara, = [Adh. X. SI]. 13-16 


Kashmerians, ministers, potters, etc. and bell-ringers come 
to grief. There will also be discord among friends. 


SAMY JIMA TAHAMAT TS 707: | 
YS FT alraaaasanssataray ies! 


Slovt13.—When Saturn is in Jyeshta, kings, 
priests, proteses of kings, heroes, associations, families 
and guilds come to grief; so do the people of Kasi, 
Kosala and Panchala, fruits, herbs and warriors, whew 
Saturn is in Moola. 


MISHIFRABMLAAT ATIF AST | 
STAT AWleT TAT Aalea F MASeai Fev 
Sloka 14.—When Saturn is in Purvashadha, the 
people of Anga, Vanga, Kosala, Girivraja, Magadha, 
Pundra, Mithila and those living in the city of Tamra- 
lipta come to grief. 


(nS Oa . 
aaa caibagied Way | 
Sadi aay TAA Hada Neal 
Sloka 15.—When Saturn is in Uttarashadha, the 
people of Dasarna, the Yavanas, Ujjain, the Sabaras, 


men living inthe Pariyatra region and the Kuntibhojas 
will suffer. 


S BURR ICCRICMCHIPDICECACICGCART TCE 
TTT ATGAAAN IZA TATA H ATT NES! 


Sloka 16.—When Saturn is in Sravana, king's off- 
cers, leading Brahmins, physicians, priests and peopie of 
Kalinga will suffer. In Dhanishta, Saturn bestows vic- 
tory on the king of Magadha and prosperity on those 
that are engaged in usury. 


Adh. X. Sl. 17-20. 1] qaatseara: 125 


as TNans Regatta | 
at os ba an 6 
ANTS 4 AQ FisTAtls Alle] F eo] 

Sloka 17.—lf Saturn be in Satabhishak and Purva- 
bhadra, physicians, poets, toddy-distillers, traders and 
politicians suffer; so do those living on the banks of 
rivers, cart-wrights, women and ¢gold when he is in 
Uttarabhadra. 


teat MAYA BiAIATAAL AAT | 
aaa faatered qaqarga Waal Atla Uell 
Sloka 18.—When Saturn is in Revati, king’s ser- 


vants, people residing in Krauncha island, autumnal 
crops, the Sabiras and the Yavanas will be afflicted. 


yal ara Aeegued| ara wWaleetaala | 
TA AAAATTNTATT FAA MAT AABT 123 
Sloka 19.—When Jupiter is in Visakha and Saturn 
in Krittika, terrible cilamity will befall mankind. If 
the two planets should transit one and the same star, 
there will be a civil feud in cities. 
AAl SW TUT: 
MIBY Ura aay TrEala: | 
TASAS ART Ae: TaAAAaT WAT 
Uh AMARA C37a ATTA | 
aeaeTA, AA AA TATA Ut 
ayl A saw: | 
via aga earat faa aqe: aia: | 
faBergt aar ae: csarargaa waa tl 
WeAa Vast we fir agags Taaza: | 
VAAAT F THAI AAA ATH URol 


126 qeaditaaa [Adh. X. SI], 21. 


Sloka 20.—-When Saturn’s orb is variegated, birds 
will suffer destruction. If his rays appear yellow, he will 
cause famine. If he is blood-red in colour, it portends 
war ; if he is ashy, there will be strife and intense hatred 


among people. 


aM aqar | -aiadta: gal wuueafaaaheradeadis 
vemiterat | | a_MTA ara wala | 


aatatas gagerarat 
araraeiggaan tes Ta | 
4 Ti atigiaesta aT 
aaa: TTA Hag Ue 
Sloka 21.—It is a tradition among sages that if 
Saturn be as bright as :the beryl, he brings on happiness 
to the people. Similarly, he is auspicious if he is jet 
black like the Vana flower or deep-blue like the Atasi- 
flower. Whichever colour Saturn assumes, he proves des- 
tructive to that ciass of people represented by that colour— 
that is, white-Brahmins, red-Kshatriyas, yellow-Vaisyas 
and dark-Sudras. 
AM A TT: | 
WAUBAT SA earadiarenay | 
aqraerat aat gesenkaa waz 
At FT TUT: | 
Gey: Reanhisae: sara RregalS: wher: | 
aera aasTe aaa Zeae y- eke, 
Thus ends the 10th Adhyaya on the “ course of Saturn”. 


eee 


Adh. XI.SI. 1-5] --Garaaiisvara: 197 


AAT NLL Ketu. 


Tita Pera maasazassd 4 | 
aeuty ag eer PeaasaaTgTaNe: el 
Sloka 1.—Having comprehended the peculiarities 
of Ketu’s transit as treated of by sages Garga, Parasara, 
Asita, Devala and many others, I expound the same in 
the most unambiguous manner. 
TAAMMAM I A TaAAaal WEIa gay | 
eeqraiadiani ita: wa: Fat TAN UR 
Sloka 2.—lIt is not possible to find out by calculation 
the rising or setting of Ketu, inasmuch as there are three 
sorts of Ketus, viz., celestial, atmospheric and terrestrial. 


APIMAsAVSd akaaeATealwy | 
aaaNtarssaateaaigq wtasa 12 
Sloka 3.—In places where, though there is no fire, 
there is still an igneous appearance, Ketu’s presence is 


recognised except where there are glow-worms, phos- 
phoric lights on graves, gems, jewels and the like. 


STATA ATTAIVATT FAT ACTFEAATA | 
eal agra ara waqraiseqat Afaa: lle 


Sloka 4.—The atmospheric Ketus are such as are 
seen on flagstafis, weapons, houses, trees, horses, ele- 
phants and the like; the celestial ones are those that 
are scen among the asterisms. Such as do not belong 
to the above two categories are to be known as terrestrial 
Ketus. 


TTR THAS AAAI Tied RATT | 
TERMSAT TE Araleas Faq Wal 


128 geeaigarany [Adh. XI. Sl], 67, 


Sloka 5.—There are 101 Ketus according to some 
sages such as Parasara, while others like Garga say that 
they are 1000 in number. But sage Narada declares 
that there is only one Ketu which appears in manifold 


forms. 
aul A Mai: | 


Maa aUTAgAaat @ sad | 
Mra AA VA awara Fy 
AAT A ATT: | 
Reaeaeadtn va ws: Sa: Tavita: 
BMTATS Vs TAUGAAASa: tl 
~ 4 Or ae id S _ 
VAR At Tea: HAA TS F AAA areayq | 
A x _ DH CX. 
SEMAAG: Mt: WCrqaarans Fl 
Sloka 6.— What does it matter whether there is but 
one Ketu or more ’ The effects at all events should be 
declared through the rising and setting (including the 
particular direction thereof), position (in which part of the 
firmament vis-a-vis planets and asterisms), contact, the 
act of covering the neighbouring celestial body with a 
smoky mantle and colour. 
~~ “ 
GaGa S8al Alatalaeq TT] BSA: | 
‘N . 
Wasaga IeyAeGaT eI: (bli 
Sloka 7.~ The effects of Ketu will last for as many 
months as the number of days during which it is visible. 
In the same way the number of years can be guessed 
from the number of months durine which it is visible, 
the effect in all cases commencing after the first three 
fortnights of its appearance. 
aa @ ai: 
waeasia CITI Aeraealaly GS WAT | 
alatel waged aradissqia HAT 


Adh. XI. SI. 8-10] garesttsearz: 129 


ATAKIWa: BA TAaAsA YBUBPRA 1 
aaesAa war ws HerssizAga: u 
aal A TET: | 

aad faaiitearacaranearasaz | 
PaATARaTa alls BA BAT: WaTTa 
AEALBSAT TARKBAD YUIYRA | 
aaengiea Fal Gs Aerssieaga: u 


AMS: WAT Ravaecagerawataa: ww | 
seqisaanRae: aluaaiwae: Haz lic! 

Sloka 8.—-If Ketu is short, slender, clear, glossy, 
straight, appearing but for a short time, white, and if 
there be a shower closely following its appearance, it 
brings abundance and happiness, 

Sizal arcaidge: is another reading. 

SWAMI T YAR TARTRTA: | 


YS AAR 


sagas asa Best at usn 

Sloka 9.—If its form be quite the reverse of what 
has been stated above, it is the comet Dhumaketu and 
will not prove auspicious, especially when it resembles the 
rainbow or has two or three crests. 

Tal A Garaaigaray } 

wmiRadsiugeeda: Raa: Ravagiaeqaiea: | 

Cag: WaT: Sqeleea wrara i 

@ Bul aitalsar aa: AMATI: | 

SAIS at sanders WAT Ui 


eA TET TRUTIea: qafaaia: afar | 
maga grata cas Nott 


Sloka 10.—There ‘are 25 comets with crests known 


as Kiranas resembling a pearl necklace, gems or gold. 
z.& 17 


- 130 geeaizararg [Adh. XI. Sl. 11-13 


rR eA ne Se AE ah A ET 


fe een meyenreenponenn peters inne ag tt ene anne 
ey Senne ea 


These are the sons of the Sun ‘and appear in the East 
and West and indicate strifes among the sovereigns of 
the country. 

aut BW: | 

VYTCWMSSAEMTNSTAATAT: | 

WHENAIMNA: Bear: Tataata: 

PequUear Ta: Gar Ward araartar eran: | 

QA AVIAN FIaAATIaT 2 0 

VURESAT YAM THSAAIAIA SATTAL: | 


AaAzat Caer avacazasha fafawaar: 22H 
Sloka 11.—There are as many comets born of fire 
appearing in the South-east and resembling parrots, fire, 
Bandhujeeva flower, lac or blood and are productive of 
danger from fire. 
ai G Tat: | 
araTaniaagra sAHear Aqsa: | 
QIU UTASIIKA FANATATAT: 
AsaAGal Wel Har stasiiawaateza: | 
azizat fz waed Talametalizan 
THA AGA SAU HOTA ashy aqsas | 
eaeq ataat TaATHAeae F N22) 
Sloka 12.—There areas many Ketus rough and dark 


with crooked crests, appearing in the South, and por- 
tending pestilence to people and are the sons of Death. 


aut ST: | 
HOM SA! BAMA eeaea ATABieuar: | 
TMCGU WAI: AaATHW: TWAT: 
eingarent fren: Fomera saat 
~~ A 
APA saaameaasqasiaar 2 


Adh. XI. Sl. 14-16] Gareatseara: 131 
Sloka 13.—There are 22 comets round like a migror. 
without crest, radiant, appearing in the North-east and- 
resembling water or oil and threatening with famine. 
They are the children of the Earth. 
aut Bait: | 
aneage fara agate: atari | 
AMBASAATHM HUAAFTa: STAT: 0 
Qareat (ater ward Saag F UI : 
AMRIT TA FACHAHTATAT: Far: AAAs | 
SUA TIIed TT: Bluagtaen: riaa: ue 
Sloka 14.—There are three comets, the sons of the 


Moon which appear in the North; these resemble moon- 


light, silver, hoar-frost, Kumuda (white lotus) or Jasmine, 
and bestow pleaty of food. 


at a Ty: 


é 


aeRUssaaral waH-eeTaqar | 
aged ara: Tar AisaraMege: Baad: Vi 
qaaa cH ay Rat awitatagaeane: | 
AAAUSHAETAT TIAA AACA: uP 
Sloka 15.—The single comet with three crests and 
colours is known as Brahmadanda and is the son of 
Brahman, the creator. There is no particular direction 
fixed for this comet and it foretells the end of the world. 
aut aay. | 
qa Raga: MURA AENeaa: | 
MAAN FSA: BIKMAIS: HATA: Ul 
“qaralaainaaaaaha Araceae | 
RAAT Bat Tana aq Sa: TAS: 12H 
Sloka 16.—Thus have been described 101 comets. I: 


132 gecalgarary {Adh. XI. SI. 17-19 


es mn ep na mm ne eee bie te mma ner ei 


shall now proceed to indicate the characteristics by which 
the remaining 899 comets may be clearly perceived. 
«AANA BREA Aled Aaratearwar: | 
again Rea vated atana: it 
Sloka 17.—In the north and north-east rise the so- 
called 84 comets, the sons of Venus. They are large 
and white stars having a soft brilliance and produce unto- 
ward effects. 
aa Ss TT 
CSSACHI: Wal: LACAPAM ANAT: | 
MasAed: TAA AAT aWteaar: Ui 
Ua MAH Ala BRIA: FUTAT: | 
aalaagqiaa Siaraswe: Wal: tl 
Rava aaradat Bra: Ws: aTaaaMTET | 
AAKERS TWIN Aaad BABAST 2c 
Sloka 18.—-Glossy and lustrous are the 60 comets 
with two crests each and they are the sons of Saturn, 
They are known as Kanaka or golden comets. They 
appear anywhere and produce dire results. 
AAT A Tt: | 
giana wnagenr erat: ATA: | 
qiea Barat FT: WAAT|Al TET: | 
At aa Tega: dna amt: | 
qe: qatacitear Para area iat: ara: Nest 
Sloka 19.—There are 65 comets known as Vikacha 
or haisless, who are the sons of Jupiter and have the ap- 
pearance of a white single star. They have no crest, 
They rise in the south and are glossy. They produce 
malefic effects. ws a 


Adh. XI, St. 20-22]  waraaitsvara: 133 
BAe AM: | 
Ber ava: gaara Agrea: watfeqar: | 
ued agsacat fafer wiaragar: 
Ca FETA: Fal? MAA SATwaALs | 
Atwat Sat art: GaaNSdarasr: i 


aaa ant clay yar waster aa: | 
TIMMS: TWTHSRARTUAT loll 
Sloka 20.— Fifty-one comets born of Mercury 
named the Taskaras or thieves, are faint, very slender, 
long and white. They may rise in any direction and 
produce evil ettects. 
aut A Wt: | 
ARAAAA GA BATETB ATS: | 
Aqsa: Waar: Fear wsarauasar: i 
Ca FALAAT MAVACHUTIL WAraVNr: | 
CHIBI TAATATAAT WET: it 


TAMAS FSMGYSA: SAAT: IS: | 
TA 4 BEANE MEAAATATL: INIT: URI 


Sloka 21.—There are 60 comets born of Mars which 
are called #r&4 Ketus and they are deep-red like blood and 
fire and have three crests. They are quartered in the 
north and prove malefic when they appear. | 

aUl A WT: | 

fairer Rares war sisawaAa: | 

Tamara waa Haaia a ii 

wifeaweast Tat qEr: we: aATaa: | 

WAI: BEA Tal wat ASaasiwst: o 


raqatar wea aagion ea Saran: | 
TAM TIT FT GSAH AUB URI 


134 geeaigararg = [ Adh. XI. Sl. 23-24 

Sloka 22.—There are 33 Ketus named Tamasa- 
Keelakas who are the sons of Rahu and are well-known. 
They are seen on the discs of the Sun and the Moon and 
their effects have already been described in thc chapter 
on Ravi-chara. 

AM A TT: | 

HMA ANTIATs ALSGlE HONTAA: | 

USTATAA TAMA SHACATVIAT: 

Wuaveway qqara Bega | 

Gal GT TWAT: | 

ATGVAT FAT AGU BTHRIGET: | 

TaeasU BY TAA: HAIG hi 

FU: Ala aa TAA TRasid: | 

BIE: BISRGACVSARION ala SeaG u 

HISS ASS AEF HrSeulaal Ves: 1 

ASITUaUIA AN aI BUA 

AIalywaarassqayaweTasaay | 
AAASAAC SASIAGHST ATT 112311 

Sloka 23.—There is another set of 120 Ketus born 
of Agni named Viswarupas and endowed with rows of 
flames. These threaten mankind with serious outbreaks of 


fires. : 
aA A Wa: | 


AMAT SATA aitaarat Tage: | 

qaratiaiaarera wa saiaiaaraar: ti 

ashaga wer Sar wesitaaa aaa: | 

faa nema wt fearetraaraa: 
arate Rarcenacea Aareiyaae | 
ASMVA TAs ATTA As WIT THIMs UWI 


Sloka 24,—There are 77 Ketus named Aruna Ketus 
which are born of wind, They are dark-red im colour, and 


Adh. XI. Sl. 25-26] 9 garzarrsvara: 135 


a Nt kre SC ANON RN A, 


a ee err oa 


without discs, rough, of the form of chowries and with 
diffuse rays: when they appear, they cause misery to 
the people. 

aar St Tt: t 

AALCSIM AAT YACHT AT: | 

MAST TAAeaA YORAM: UI 

Aaa: AA Varel argyary wary | 

WIBAAAA GAT AAAKTSM WET: tt 


ARTAABA MTB A TATTAT ST | 
KAVA AUR WALA! AAA URI 


Sloka 25—There are 8 Ketus who are born of 
Brahini, and they are named Ganakas and are of the 
form of a cluster of stars. There are 204 Ketus known 
as Chaturasras who are also the offspring of Brahma. 
These produce only malefic eflects. | 

AY AMT: | 

ATT SAA ELMAN ZISSAETAT: | 

STATA ASTRAL TOE WaATTA: 

Saal Sl UGCA! al Arar: Wawgaay: | 

Ud WAT Aalst waa a 

HE AA JTVTA SUAASTTEATSTAL: | 
VATA AAA ARS! BAT Weare URS 

Sloka 26.—There are 32 Ketus declared as Kanka. 
These are the sons of Varuna and have the appearance 
of a cluster of bamboos and shine like the Moon and 
cause malefic effects. 

MAT ST Nay: | 

TUICARABA ATA: WsaT: | 

sreqrefiaantt wat: BPaargat: o 

ayaa gaa: aeazerar: | 

Ta TERS: Teer girs wer: u 


136 . geeaieatatq, «= fF Adh. XT, Sl. 27-30 
quay: RSA: HAIASAT RAFAATYTAL: | 
Great WANA: Wiaeraa Ff afaa: Voll 
Sloka 27.—The sons of Kala are 96 in number and 
are named Kabandha Ketus. They resemble headless 
bodies. They prove good to the Pundras and are with- 
out distinct discs. 
aU A Ta: I 
AUGMAeqia Saeaiaaieaar: | 
HABIAANA ATABWUAT: UI 
SIVA: PATA AAG: GZ_ aA aT CHAT: | 
BIS BYR TU: FSTTNTAAATAT: 
ae agenda aa ieat saa: ageTar: | 
ud haded Aaa sey UlRcil 
Sloka 28.—There are 9 Ketus having one broad 
and white star in them and born out of the intermediate 
directions. “Thus have been mentioned the 1000 INetus. 
I shall now state their characteristic peculiarities. 
AME A TT: | 
Besar ager akegar aa naw: | 
aigg aerate a gard wWagrasr: ti 
~ ON “ ‘ 
SEMA aary fvagiaraigal Tara: | 
aq: HUT als QMaT_ITy Fee li 
Sloka 29.—One there is named Vasaketu, who has 
got an elongated body stretched towards the north, cor- 
pulent, of a glossy form and rising in the west. The very 
day he appears and becomes visible, fatal diseases will 
break out ; but there will be abundance of food. 


ABIUSAHT: Tz IT: AAAAS: Ale: | 
TRIM FETSA TATATHTT [IZ 


Adh. XI. SI. 31-32. ] qaerzattseara; ‘187 


Sloka 30.—His (Vasaketu’s) counterpart is Astthi- 
Ketu who is also of the same characteristics. He is rough 
and is declared to be a harbinver of famine when he 
makes his appearance. There is one similar to the above, 
glossy in appearance and visible in the East and he is 
named Sastra Ketu. By his appearance, there will be 
war and pestilence. 


SqaSATAat Hiss: TAA: | 
MARASSAAN FeacHrTapHts 3 Vl 


Slok« 81.—There is a comet named Kapalaketu who 
puts in his appearance just on the Amavasya day in the 
eastern direction. His beams and crest are smoky in 
colour and he traverses half the heavens. He causes 
famine, pestilence, drought and diseases. 


WAAL AGT STASI’ | 
aaa maT UT ze HIUGSACARSs 1/3 Vil 


Sloka 82.—Raudra is the name of another Ketu 
whose elfect is similar to that of Kapala Ketu. He is to 
be seen in the course of the Dihanavecthhee in the East. 
His crest is inthe shape of a Sula (or trident); his 
flame is grey, rough and red; h2has got a tendency to 
travel a third part of the sky. 

war a TTT: | 

SHOMTSAAIA AT eit ae Aaar | 

at 4 drat Gare SqacHsy weT i 

qigoraaat gear Rrat at wag 

asta afent sara a | 
yaa sfxaere | AAT TAT 

at wirg wats ws ae aaret 

rant Taal mar act nssereaaz | 

want aatitienagaiitt axaa i 

qa. 18 


138 ageigatata §=[Adh. XI. Sl. 33-36 


meantaraiitia chiarawrear: | 


quan: ta: aat fagaica eat aa 
avatar: Raat aeagayeNesaat | 
TSIMAMTS IAT Tat SeaATaa vss 


adgatly aegsa waaaiaaa aq mata: | 
AMASTAAMA WFAA TTTATA Avil 
SeACAAMARSIAMATAedl FT FRUITY | 
Sa a SiaHrTs yay Aeagareaq uF4I 
AeA qa tard Hawlrgied Magia: | 
TM AAT TOISAS RATT AH UE 


Slokas 33-36—There is a Chalaketu or a moveable 
comet rising in the west. His crest isan inch high and is 
turned to the scuth. His length increases the more it 
goes to the north. After touching the Seven Sages 
(Great Bear)—Vasishta and others—and also the Pole 
Star (Dhruva) and the star Abhijit he returns after 
travelling half the sky and sets in the south. When 
this comet appears, people in the region beginning 
from the banks of the Prayag and extending to 
the town of Ujjain and Pushkara forest will be destroyed. 
Those living in the north as far as ‘the Devika river and 
the whole of the middle country will be wiped out. 
Other countries also will suffer from diseases and famine 
here and there. These effects will happen in the course 
of ten months. Others say it will be felt for 18 months. 


TUT @ aT: | 


QwseTATHranaay: GFVNSAT Ts: 
HIATT AN AUS! SF ASHY: TIEN: 


Adh. XI. S]. 37-41.] —- garesi}s<ara: 139 


TMEACTA UAT: Mahaeayz | 

B ea aMaHlacan area aqitazsay 201 
rat atrakractaanas esad Hara a: | 
TT TUCTING Wasa TeTRIHAY U8cit 


Slokas 37-38.—Sweta (white) Ketu is a comet who 
is visible in the eastern direction at mid-night. He has 
his crest turned to the south. There is a second comet 
Ka by name in the ‘form of a yoke and can be seen in 
the west. Both these can be seen at the same time 
for a period of 7 days. They are clear and augur good 
and plenty to mankind if they be glossy. Should how- 
ever the comet Ka be visible for more than seven days, 
then it denotes that there will be war for ten years and 
consequent distress. 


MT BWA ATH SA Baral aerate: | 

Afrawastasd GATTI: TAL Het 133i 
Sloka 89.—The comet named Sweta Ketu is like 
matted hair, rough and black ; after travelling a third of 


the distance in the sky, he retrogrades in the anti-clock~ 
wise Manner and destroys two-thirds of the population. 


Mp gq ean cwaaras Hansa: | 
a: a Uaaea: ATTA TF TA voh 
Sloka 40—There is a comet having his seat near the 
asterism Krittika, who makes himself visible by his ashy- 
coloured crest, Heis known as Rasmi Ketu and gives 
effects similar to those of Sweta Ketu. 
Cas C a 
qaadtiaaantararaarpaaaa eas | 
eqeakada area feava gens: 188i 


140 geeaigarar §=[Adh. XI. S], 42-45 


TAS TUT Yeasaog aly Farag | 
TRA F Rahat cat ana Wee 
Slokas 41-42—-There is another comet known as 

Dhruva Ketu. His rate of motion, colour, magnitude 
and form are not regular. He travels everywhere in all 
the three worlds. He is soft and clear and gives auspi- 
cious effects, If he should be seen by the kings on their 
martial equipments, by people of countries on their 
houses; trees and mountains and by house-holders on their 
vessels and the like, these are doomed to destruction. 


Sue aft ggcntaareoat oral fara | 
ze: afaanad ca fas aatitr a sla val 
Sloka 43—A comet named Kumuda with his crest 
stretched in the east and with white lustre is observable 
in the west for only one night. As soon as he is visible, 


people in the world will have unique peace and plenty for 
a continuous period of ten years. 


AHHAUATTT: YACATTISTET Alera | 
aed Rata Jat Baga aizates ivi 
STIAT BMT AAU AAT Aaa Arsys | 
mgald AT: BUA AT AAA TAT [eit 
Slokas 44-45.—Mani Ketu is the name of a comet. 
He is a very tiny little star appearing in the west and 
observable for only once and that too for a period of 
three hours. His crest is white and straight like a line of 
milk emanating from the breast. He hails with plenty. 
of food lasting for.a period of 4144 months, But he 
generally causes reptiles and venomous creatures to come 
into existence, 


Adh. XI. Sl. 46-50} —- Guragits<ara: 141 


weRIUT a gg Rava: frearaer aieaat | 
qT WATT T Tiel Fla Aled T GHA vel 
Sloka 46.—The comet Jalaketu also appears in the 
west. Ile is spotless in his form and has a crest slightly 
higher inclined towards the west. He causes peace and 
abundance of food for a period of nine months. 


AARAHRUA CVT ATH AETaTTR: (ArT | 
ehtarqerrTat TAANTAAa AAAI 11 B\9Il 


UT UT HRA TAAATTMA saeaTATy | 
MAIS BAT SA MTA Ty vel 
Slokas 47-48,—There is another comet Bhava Ketu 

by name which makes his appearance for one night in the 
east and is a tiny glossy star. He has got a crest turned 
to the right and resembling the tail of a lion. There will 
be unprecedented abundance of food for so many months 
as the number of Muhurtas for which he is visible. Should 
however he be rough instead of soft in body, there will 
be an outbreak of diseases which will prove mortal to 
mankind. 


ATT TATATISAR AATARTT | 
aa Billa aire qromaergATe lei 
' Stoka 49.~When the comet Padmaketu which ap- 
pears only for one night in the west and white like the 
fibre of lotus stalk, people in the land will enjoy happi- 
ness for a period of seven years. 
mat 2 Pag aeahratsomaaisn fava: | 
WAT IOUT STATA ATY TTA: |lkoil 
Sloka 50.—Avartha is the nameof another Ketu 
appearing at’mid-night in the west with his crest ‘turned to 


142 geedigarara, [Adh. XI. S1. 51-53 


the South, glossy and red in colour. As many Muhurtas 
he makes himself visible, for so many months there will 
be peace and plenty to mankind. 
GAlq AAS Aldi aA FRAT: | 
aera fava aera TE: Wy 2ll 
Qaa Ul BMY Teal avi efta arava | 
WUT VANITY Fess 1.42 
Slokas 51-52.—-During the time of Sun-set a Ketu 
named Samvarta witha crest smoky and coppery in 
colour makes his appearance in the west. He occupies a 
a third of the sky and is stationed likea trident and is 
frightful to look at. As many Muhurtas as he is visible, 
for so many years there will be war and strife among 
kings and they will ultimately perish. Men whose natal 
star is identical with the one in which the comet appears 
will also suffer. 
AUT TWiT: 
wat aaairaa Sar: asqreerita: | 
equa agafaa act farereagraay u 
way Terare ocala ehiaaa a 
SAAT BWIHITABA: tl 
UMRMBa AAA TATA AA Aroha | 
GIA VAAgny Eearentagaary tt 
AMNAISAAA HAA FHA aa | 
qua dreagty aaregq¢eay vag, || 
Rava: naw faye: aatoiraaa 1 
gare ag tag ia ay fafargara 
WATS AT: AU: Tarayars arasgeg | 
fmennagakt Aeraearas: Sq: u 
a geared fear Hata Vasaar eae | 
~ o na N 
ATA AAT TAL AT Tg WAST TTT WAU 


Adh. XI. SI. 54-56] garquitsvara: 143 


Sloka 53.— Barring the Ketus (comets) that are good, 
I shall proceed to state the several princes that will be 
killed according as the other (malefic) comets eclipse the 
several stars by their tails or come in contact with the 
same. 


AMAT AMG PeTaMyy sea | 

qT Hogs Wika aaagiaq weve 
Sloka 54. When the asterism Aswini is dimmed or 
touched by a malign comet, the chief of the Asmakas will 
die. If Bharani be the star in question, it is the Kirata 
king that will be killed. When the star is Krittika, the 


Kalinga chief will perish. If the star be Rohini, the head 
of the Surasenas will meet with his death. 

easy ~ \ a ~ 6 . 

HMATAaT Arey gear sHhawiase qari | 

HCAS FF AMTNTAT ateT WM 

Sloka 55. The king of the Useenaras will be killed 

when a bad comet dims or touches the star Mrigasira. 
The chief of the fishermen will be killed when the star 
Ardra is eclipsed by sucha comet. The chief of the 
Asmakas and the lord of the Magadhas will respectively 
meet with their end when the asterisms Punarvasu and 
Pushya are contaminated by a malignant comet. 


maRT ving PEASE osAAT ary | 
RAAT AI cosRUIaT Weel 


Sloka 56. If the star be Aslesha, the head of the 
Asikis will be killed. The ruler of the Migadhas_ will 
die if the star in question be Magha. The king of the 
Pandya kingdom wiil take his exit when the asterism s 
Parvaphalguni. When the star is Uttaraphalguni, the 


144 geeatearara, = [ Adh. XI. SI. 57-60. 


chief of Ujjain will die. The lord of the Dandaka 
country will be affected when the star is Hasta. 


Faatg getarira aw qarisaasg: | 
n ay \ “ 
BAALKHFUT TI WAAA A A Ml! 

Sloka 57. When a imaticn Netu cclipses or touches 
the star Chittra, people in the know should declare the 
exit from the world of the chief of Kurukshetra. If the 
star in quesiion be Swati, the two kings of Kasmira and 
Kamboja will ccase to exist. 

LETH SHAGA Sead Ae WTAE | 
(a a 0 & . 
ae Peaasigy FT aTaMTT YC 

Sloka 58. If Visakha be the acterism that is thus 
eclipsed, the chiefs of the Ikshvakus and the Alakas will 
become extinct. A bad comet hitting the star Anuradha, 
the head of the Pundras wiil dic. An emperor wiil mect 
with his end if the star in question be }yceshta. 

YSseAAHTa Tara RAT Hala | 
* c Con = ba ein iy 
TRBATIMAMAT AY TACT FT UAH 

Sloha 59. Tf the star Moola be eclipsed or dimmed 
by a malign comet, the chiefs of Andhra and Madraka 
countries will be killed. When the star in question is 
Purvashadha, the king of Kasi will perish. If it be Uttara- 
shadha, the kings of Yaudheya, Arjunayana, Sibi and 
Chedi will meet with their destruction. 

A bd ¢ 7 ¢ 
SrA HHI Wag essay aHT | 
atarard Rad waoss Waar aT: Noll 
Sloka 60. If the asterism eclipsed happen to be 


any of the 6 stars from Sravana onwards, the following 
in their order will respectively meet with their end; 1. the 


Adh. XT. Si. 61-62]  garaaitseare: 145 


eee cee ee Een MALT RTE AAC CCS ee 
ones: 


ee os Re 


lord of the Kekayas; 2. of the Panchanadas; 3. the 
lord of the Simhala; 4. the lord of the Vangas; 5, the 
king of the Naimisha country; 6. the Chief of the 
Kiratas. 

sentuaeage: real Ra: Rraratisagt a: | 

FIA A TT DoamoypargTr aaa Ns 2 

Sloka 61. A comet whose crest has been hit by 

an Ulka (meteor) will prove auspicious; and if there be © 
rain as soon as he is risen, it will be still more auspici- 
ous, The same wiil become unfavourable to the. 
people of Chola, Afghans, the white Huns and the > 
Chinese. 


afaee: is another reading in the Ist line. 
amt aa: Paaranaar sat aT 
Ra Taq Ia aeaiaaia Tag | 
eeaqq AAAI FT AAT Way 
WE Ma aaa: Taira us 
Sloka 62. Note the quarters where the crests of the 
comets are bent or crooked, where they are projecting ; 
also the asterisms hit or touched. The rulers of the 
countries denoted by or situated in these will be defeated 
through superhuman power by a foreign king who takes | 
possession of all the pleasures enjoyed by them so far, 
just as Garuda destroys and feasts on the bodies of the 
serpents which are his enemies. 
TAT ST GUAM: 
aut Rt agratat fea aitiar | 
Ua: Ral Gat Yaa arareanaq: 
Masa qa: Barsrarit ava qnsa: | 
AAAUNEATIS: @ ATTAINS 01 
7.a. 19 


146 geeararany [Adh. XII. Sl. 2. 


F seteeiebeeeen nad eine - 


ae ee at ee ener tenes 


er RE ERO EE RE ESR Ree HOF win Ae ei PRATE NETS, 


ter visa aaTe yaa: Simenige: Pret 
aasaeenet & aa Vasa aaa | 
Ra WRYRieaga aarssiaaraica 
mag aitasy years Wea areTy 


Notre.—Compare (with the above) what modern science has to 
say on the subject of comets : 

“\Vhat then is a comet according to the latest scientific 
researches ? The spectroscope has pretty well sclved the query. 
It consists, first, of a more or less solid nucleus of fire, blazing and 
glowing ; second, of vast masses of incandescent gas, constituting 
the luminous head; third, solid materials, consfituting the tail, whick 
are ponderable, which reflect the Sun’s light and are carried along 
by the influence of the nucleus ; fourth. an immense prolongation 
of the tail in the nature of attenuated volumes of gas, The solid 
materials of a comet, it is believed, consist of stones and sand, 
particles ground by ceaseless attrition, The proof of. this is the 
concession of most astronomers that meteoric showers are shreds 
and patches of cometic matter» dropped {rom the tail, and these 
moteers arestones. The genesis of comets is found to be in the 
explosion of planetary bodies, a theorv not without good scientific 
authority. 

Arago estimates that there !are 17,000,000 'of these fiery wan- 
derers within the orbit of Neptune, and Lambert regards 
500,000,000 as a moderate estimate for those in the solar system. 
All the astronomers agree that they are scattered through space as 
profusely as tne fishin the seas. The Orbit of the Earth is over- 
whelmed in a fine net work of cometary orbits, and our globe is 
jikea lost child in a forest full of wfld beasts. ” 


CHIDAMBARA IYER. 
Thus ends the 11th Aghyaya on the “course of Comets”. 


ATTA WR Agasthya (Canopus). 


maaMaaaal Reearas: wea 
Maia galaq Asis aarau | 


Adh. XII. SI. 1-6] — gresitseara: 147 


qaaqraialaeartieaiataal Beat | favaylear 
TAMCAGA TUTAHAME AMAA Ul 
Sloka 1.—The course of Sage Agasthya is treated 
here briefly, that sage, the ocean of penance, who 
purifies the waters, who suppressed the Vindhya moun- 
tain whose peak or summit grew up obstructing the 
Sun’s path, by whom the demon Vatapi, the enemy of 
the Gods and the tearer of stomachs of sages, was 
devoured and absorbed. who drank off the ecean and 
who adorns the southern quarter. 
The sloka is from #@a1tHalgzal. 


ARTIST TORRTAAUCATAAaT 
HAMAMeSal ATs Bat aq BAe: | 
ae IEE a HATHA TATRA: 
HE qaNee raggeecaniaa Gur UR 
aa meeqeeasia Agana: TAAAT A: | 
Paiteageia isa AnMTsRAL FaTtTa: URN 
RHRUMAATSAaAT: Aqcaany aera: | 
MIT WaeAAsIT aia aa Haaiwatsathaayz ll 
aaTlaagiMAIgaa: aeaswmasts aa: aay | 
ARS AAMISEAIA: ALAS Tela als Say Ul 
aMaITI atlas CHeHaETTArT IITA | 
BMRNISUAA AAI SESTTAIT WHT A: ull 
ARTIS Asad Ways 
VMTN TTAB ITA SsaIa- 
ararAUy aa gaara as: MWA 
BHATIA ACHAT slg aATa | ie- 
BRAVA: HT TTgeitaldaarg- 


Ee EE 


148 greatgarary [Adh. XII. $1. 7 


area RETR aaraigaranitinaey | 
TUTTO Sara TIEGNTBCHSTA- 
AMATATATRTTS qemeR aH 
UageMTs TIgwATATTATEATAT: 

WA ARATHA TIA HeTTayE Buear- 
Rrarnanrararaaqanaarentanetd 
TCUARMETITA TAT ATA INI 


Slokas 2—7—Listen ! ye, now, to the description of 
the appearance of the Sage, who, in days of yore, sud- 
denly heightened the splendour of the ocean by the dry- 
ing up of its waters through the mountains situated in the 
interior whose summits were scooped out by the claws of 
crocodiles and which had streams of water in the form 
of choice gems an‘ jewels falling upon them along with 
pearls, putting to shame as it were the Gods having a 
limited number of gems on their diadems, 


He, by whom the ocean though deprived of | its 
watery contents, was made more heautiful by means of 
the mountains shorn of their trees and decke1 with gems, 
jewels and corals and through the serpents that emerged 
from them in long rows, 

He by whom the great ocean though brought to grief 
being drained off, was raised to divine glory since it 
displayed glittering whales, water-elephants and serpents, 
also heaps of gems scattered about, 

The Commentator interprets the first two compounds as 
applying to Devaloka also. 

Though the water is taken away, the ocean filed 
with floundering whales, pearl-oysters and conch-shells , 


Adh. XII. SI, 7] Q1e arsvara: 149 


still possesses the splendour of a lake in autumn with its 
waves, lotuses and swans, 


He who converted the ocean (the lord of the rivers) 
into the sky, as it had white clouds in the form of whales, 
stars in the form of gems, the Moon in the form of 
crystal gem, the autumnal lustre in the form of the water- 
less bed and Ketus or comets in the form of the rays of 
the gems on the hoods of serpents, 

And he who stemmed the Vindhya Mountain which 
was bent upon obstructing the course of the Sun’s car- 
nave and so had moving peaks, and which was adorned 
by the flags hoisted aloft in the form of clothes on the 
bodies of the Vidyadharas, who clinging to the shoulders 
of their confused lovers eagerly seated them on their own 
laps ; which possesses streams inside the caves occupied 
by lions whose heads are covered with bees following the 
fravrance caused by the tasting of the blood mixed with 
xchor on the heads of the elephants and are wearing orna- 
mental wreaths of ‘Vana’ flowers as it were on their 
heads ; which was scratching as it were, the firmament 
with its uplifted peaks which had the deep sound of 
humming of the swarms of the intoxicated bees that were 
scattered by the shaking of the trees in bloom by the 
elephants and which (peaks) were the abodes of hyenas» 
bears, tigers and monkeys ; which is embraced in private 
by the Rewa river (Narmada} having the Madana trees 
on her banks just as one is embraced in amorous sport by 
wae’s beloved, in whose gardens dwell the Gods and 
which is accompanied by saves who subsist on water, 
nothing, roots and air ; such was the Vindhya, when he 
was stemmed by Agasthya. Listen! ye, now, to the 
nsing of that sage. 


150 aeaigararg [Adh. ‘XL. S]. 8-10 
STA FT PACMTAAA: FARA AAG alia | 
cain aaiea aura gawgia aaied frees lic 


Sloka 8.—At the appearance of Sage Agasthya, the 
waters that are soiled (in the monsoon) * by their contact 
with mud become clear once avain spontaneously, just 
as the minds that are defiled by the contact with the 
wicked become purified automatically at the sight of the 
virtuous. 


Cf. Raghavamsa IV-21. 
NAAIIGAGEA: BEA ATAAETAA: tl 


Waza STARRING MT TAAATSA | 
ATT RBCwITAITea AAs WIT IAAT USM 


Slola 9.—The autumn nurturing a oY of cackling 
swans flanked on both sides by ruddy geese, “shines like a 


smiling dainsel whose front teeth are tinged red by betel 
leaves. 


It is a well known fact that Agasthya appears in the autumn 

making it very resplendent with bright moon-light, clear water, 

eautiful lotuses, charming rows of swans returning from the a(qa- 
Manasa lake and goad roads, 


af‘caqgiat is another read ng. 
qealataaiadeasiiraa algaaqqerg aera 
ayBAUArazanam Agaaisa Aas wart ott 


Sloka 10.—The autumn which is endowed with 
white lotuses by the side of blue lilies and which is 
adorned with rows of hovering bees, appears as charming 
as a dexterous damsel in love with side-long glances 
coupled with knitted brows. 


Adh. XII. S). 11-15] — argaitseara: 151 


ERE RNR REE Rates pte — eed array gape om" 


an Taraaaatat Aydt xe AISA gat fag | 
Vu VIMiolamlags FINA Ta Aslaaanaaacated 

Sloka 11.—The pond with the bracelets of eddying 
waves opens at night the lilies under whose petals rest 
the bees as its eyes with dark pupils and beautiful lashes, 
as though to witness the Moon’s splendour caused by the 
disappearance of the clouds. 


ateiia WAT RATS TS THR BIOS T TATE | 
Ts TA: FI! TSA WISATTATCAATA ULI 


Sloka 12.—The Earth with the hands of pools rep- 
lete with various kinds of lotuses, swans, ruddy geese and 
ducks greets, as it were, Sace Agasthya with the presents, 
viz., abundant gems, flowers and fruits. 


TissMAgTAAISTA aaa eTE TEAR: | 
HloraaT MAAS wala (a4 ATNTATAAAT ea 


Slokt 13.—The water which has been poured out at 
the command of the rain-god Indra, by the serpents 
whose bodies are wrapt up in the clouds and which (water) 
is spoiled by fire and poison emitted by them, become 
pure at the appaasance of Sage Sale. 


wUMTaty TAT HS Paya eghitarenRTE: | 
qiate: Hadise aaqryara: HANA AT aie SAC KL: | lI 


Sloka 14.—The sage, Varuna’s son, removes sin ata 
mere thought; how much more when it is coupled with 
invocations ! I am now describing for the benefit of the 
sovereign the method of propitiating the Sage as pro 
pounded by the sages. 


qeataasdeaaa Agia aearaasysa: | 
TAATWATIA Beat At: UTA THTATEHTA 124? 


152 agearearargy =[Adh. XII. Sl. 16-17 


— 


ne I LR a er 
etre ar ame eee nerf OE EE AOE ERE ATE RTS SmLniTNTNe — aivAetnarr ae NE AT 


Sloka 15.—The time of rising of Agasthya for each 
country should be .determined and stated through cal- 
culations by the astronomer. Now, for Ujjain, it takes 
place wher the Sun’s true position is 7° short of sign 
Kanya, | 

(a) Colebrooke has copiously commented on this passage, 
Misc. Essays, ii p. 353, seg (As Res.ix). The passage from the 
Panchasiddhantika referred to by Colebrooke, as analogcus to one 
in the Bhasvati is * 

fayassiaaqo TaRAAasAAIaATy | 

srutagegqea TUUgina faatsra: 

aa: ahead aren aearat | 

AUR AAATAAAUVASS HITE: Ut TaTAAeaTsH 

“Multiply half the length of the equinoctial shadow by 25; 
take from this product, expressed in minutes, the corresponding 
arc :add the length of the shadow multiplied by 21g multiply by 
10 ; this gives the number in Vinadis. At this number, reckoning 
from the beginning of Cancer, stands the Sun when Agasthya rives 
in the seutn, like a mark on the front of a damsel.” 

GMT AAaAasarary | 

BUA: BeTWAMA Vas J iZaTA se | 

SAaSMVA Saal ataATaqis*aag on 
Ley Os ~ Ades , AX Ca 
STATA ASOMNURAT GAYS FART (eT CaN | 

Wn AA AR a eS g ba 
arrcavacaieaart Zarsageat Wad: WAST NLS" 
HIE BUA: FAT TOM 
Waal ATTA: HABITAT | 
ear TIT TWaArATIaA Aes 
a ~~ aw s 
AEN: AUTATT AS TTT |! X09 

Slokas 16-17.—At the time when the nocturnal dark. 
hess is just pierced by the mass of Aruna’s rays, the king 
being pure skould offer in the south on the Earth the 


Adh. XII. SI. 18-20] FTW SEI: 153 


presents consisting of fragrant flowers and fruits of the 
season, of gems from the sea, of gold, garment, milch 
sows, bulls, Payasa, edible curd, coloured rice, fragrant 
incense and pastes when the particular direction “of the 
wise is announced by the astronomer. 


afaktaad weatat cara: 
araanzagn fatsarniaaas | 

wala ale a TEAqaI arz- 
TaaaraTTaan: atat ala yar urcit 


Sloka 18.—Should a king make these offerings with 
a devout heart, he would be free from all diseases, and 
conquer the entire host of his enemies. If he should 
make such offerings fora period of seven years conti- 
paously according to rules, he would rule over the entire 
earth girdled by the ocean. 


feat TATHAGATA: arate LAL TAT FATT | 
aay at Ye at a aa Cinaa ayas waa NH 


Sloka 19.—Should a Brahmin make the offerings 
accordine to his status, he would be blessed witha 
thorough knowledge of the Vedas,a charming wife and 
sons. If he bea Vaisya, he would get cattle. If he be 
a Sudra, he would become very wealthy. All persons in 
general who may undertake this will be free from diseases 
and will get benefits of virtue. 


UAT BUA TEI: Hseras 
YA TATATAS TH ATT 
WMATA: Jaaeaty 


SUCIA GATE AATAT 112041 
wa. 20 


154 geeaigararg, = [Adh. XII. Sl. 21-22 


Sloka 20.—Agasthya causes diseases when he ts 
rough ; drought, when he is russet ; harm to cows, if 
smoky ; if he should be throbbing, there would be fear 
engendered ; if similar to madder in colour, he brings 
famine and wars; when he istiny, he forebodes the 
slege of the town. 


MAFEAATT: THeHraaaayy ast PRCT: | 
ITT WR AA TFTA FATA ART TATSTT URL 


Sloka 21.—If he shines like ‘gold or crystal and ap- 
pears to refresh, as it were, the [arth with streams of his 
rays, the country will have plenty of food and team with 
a contented and healthy population. 


AA A WT: | 
AFH PEMA ALUSTAATA: | 
CWA ANNA: BKAUAAABT: I 
SMAMATAAAAAINATSA: | 
winaay faraa: BRsseaa car 
seaat ffrea: Biaat at aga acnaa 7474 | 
zaad a feo canase Cag IT asAgua UR 
Sloka 22,—If he be struck by a meteor or comet, he 
will bring danger of famine and pestilence. It is said 
that he rises when the Sun is in the asterism Hasta and 
sets when the Sun has reached Rohini.* 


* “See Colebrooke, dc. His statement that there are three 


pa@iods of rising and setting, according to Utpala, is not quite 
exact. On th: contrary, Utpala expressly intimates that the 
rising of Canopus when tke Sun stanls in Hasta, is contrary to 
science, and only repeated by the author out of deference for the 
Ancients. He says [#a(taaa4, which is quite true; where our 
author uses in@, it isso much as relata refero quart aMaart a 
wala TacaraT Ytaeagseate HAL! The three periods of rising are 


Adh. XIII. Sl. 1-2. ] aargatseara: 155 


enumerated by Parasara, as quoted by Utpala. Here part of the 
passage: 
qa Squat: | wae alaagata wieuteedt aaah 1 aera 
AMVANITIBSl CS. AAAWMMTiVHyagAsel: wiaaieeat at | TAt- 
APMASigs: Qateaaraarqene |” —Dr. Kern. 
BTA) gaia AME eqTAIyIyIWz | 
give aaa aa ATA waa tl 
Garrat: Fag wag: | 
git: agra saraaaaa a i 
Thus ends the 12th Adhyaya on the ‘Course of Agasthya.’ 


AgTaw 1231 The Seven Sages. 


AHAB Usts aadeisqisal aaa | 
aaadla & fava: Biadt antares neu 
TTMAITMACTT AAT WALK | 
wane wat Halasy sgasiyargq 1 
Slokas 1-2.—I shall describe according to the theory 
of Sage Vriddha Garga, the course of the Seven Seers, by 
whom the northern region has a lord as it were, through 
whom she shines as if adorned with a necklace of pearls 
tke a maiden with a joyful countenance wearing a wreath 
of white lotuses ; the seers by whose circular movements; 
the northern region seems verily dancing at the instruc- 
tion of the Pole-Star, the leader. 
IU A USHNTA: | 
qaaes aaa ftawdyAgaey | 
aAqasaTAgIn ward cagisaferny ti 
aut gatat aNwe Tenia sufez | 
GEMM Aa ATIAMATarawaserens u ea 


156 geeigarara [Adh. XIII. Sl. 3-4 


MAANE Yaa Waa wat Ae grat | 
WRIST VHRMSMA UT '13I1 


Sloka 3.—The Seven Sages were in the lunar man- 
sion—Magha—when King Yudhishtira was ruling over 
the earth, the period of that King being 2526 years be- 
fore the commencement of the Saka (Vikramarka?) era. 


The assumption made by certain commentators that 74 
should invariably refer to Vikrama Saka (56 B.C.) does not seem 
to be altogether correct. For,it is said in the Mahabharata that 
Kali set in soon after Krishna’s departure. This should be 3102 
B.C. Hence the age of Yudhishtira should be somewhere at the 
earlier part of the 32nd century before Christ. Subtracting 2526 
from this figure we find that the Saka referred to in the Slokashould 
be in the 7th Century B.C. (far earlier than the age of the Buddha 
—5th century B. C.). Hence the above remark. 


aut a gua 4 
afagravara g faa mazaag | 
Yaa qaracar: Asai Wear Tar: U 
AQ AK *® ° wes lon . 
BRalaaad Ud WI d Wed THT | 
ba fo ° 
MITAMS WATER AUA TA ATA UY 
Sloka 4.—The sages in their course remain for a 
period of 100 years in each lunar mansion. Whichever 
star to the east of which the sages rise, makes them con- 
spicuous, in that they are said to be posited. 
Wgaaa azar Fasrar: ig another reading. 
According to this reading, the meaning will be “they rise 
constantly in the northeast, together with the chaste Arundhatee.” 


aar @ Hq: | 


wat Ta | astursaweny ada: i 
aaa Maal & Wareater AETaq: 


Adh. XIII. Sl. 5-10.]  wareetisvara: 157 


Gi Ala ATATEAT ATT al TAgIsATT | 
AANSUAAISAAATA: FSET UI 
GBs: MARA ATAATA ATRAT Farag | 
qT AAG girawgaaareeqat area Nl 
Slokas 5-6—Sage “Marichi is situated in the east ; to 
the west of him is Vasishta ; to his west is Angiras ; and 
to the west of Angiras is situate1 Atri ; in his neighbour- 
hood can be seen Pulasthya. Next to him are in order 
Pulaha and Kratu. Arundhatee, the paragon of virtue, 
is following the great Sage Vasishta. 
seRIMATaaea ay fees Zea: | 
aa: @ & aa Agar: fara ager iloll 
Sloka 7.—When these stars are pale, devoid of 
beams, vexed by meteors, thunderbolts, smoke and the 
like, or tiny, they will destroy severally their own depen- 


dencies (as stated below), while they tend to make the 
Same prosper if they appear large and bright. 


aa A TTT: | 

SoH agar aly qaa wane ars 

Sar ao: asar ar mewn: aitafsa: w 

@ % all az aegqia: ad aa a 

fagar Rataqoiog wanaiea ae: 
WeTTSAC IATA AT UAZITATAT | 
Ghee MiP Aaa a ies 
VTHITATTE TUCABIFT TATA TAT ATT | 
ated aagistieat ase waar: SII 
RRMA Taga dacat ara Aizen | 
AA BANA TSsaNeaewA A: Aa 12oll 


158 gecaiearary [Adh. XIII. S}, 11 


A ET ER TTY CS ATI SN tN ne at ee me met ee ne ee = rere meen oe 


TAMA aAIGN TIN JUTE | 
GVEA TJ FURS HAET AI TITTA: 112 il 
Slokas 8-Ji--Marichi is to be understood to do 

harm (when vexed) to the Gandharvas, Gods, demons, 
spelis, herbs, angels, Yakshas, Nagas and Vidyadharas. 
Vasishta, when hurt, proves destructive to the Sakas, 
Yavanas, Daradas, Paratas, Kambojas and hermits living 
in the forest; when radiant, he bestows prosperity. 


Scholars, intelligent men and Brahmins are enume- 
rated as belonging to Angiras; and foresters, aquatic 
products, the ocean and rivers are allotted to Sage Atri. 

Giants, devils, demons, Daityas and serpents are said 
to belong to Fulasthya ; to Pulaha, roots and fruits, and 
to Kratu, sacrifices and sacrificers. 


AM A TEM: | 

SAAT: FATIATNUATAT | 

atm faanaa: ae aaa: ahatigan: || 
ATA. WLAMA BFA STIT: WHT: | 
afagea fararewiarqar aaaiiaat: i 
Waal TAN FA AAAI AWM: | 
SITIAVTAAH! ZAUuga: Cat: 
HAA AAAI BAY altetiorar: | 
Aral aaal sear BAR UaTaraAI 
guwaag fafafier: ger we Gs a aT 
aa ISR AM Awad FH 
Rata (aralssr Taal AA i 
Thus ends the 13th Adhyaya on the ‘Course of the Seven 

Sages.’ 


Adh. XIV.] qasarsearg: 159 


eet come eee 


auatmeara: 28 Kurma Vibhaga. 


With reference to our Puranas, it cin be ascertained that 
aqz17-Jambudweepa (one of the seven continents surrounding 
the mountain Meru) was divided into nine sub-continents each 
being termed a qq-Varsha. These nine diviSions are (1)ae- 
Kuru (2) tcaq-Hiranmaya (3) caTHRamyaka (4) erat 
Ilavrita (5) e&Hari (6) HaarKetumila (7) ARIA. 
Bhadraswa (8) fwat-Kinnara and (9) wta-Bharata. The name 
of the Adhyava suggests in itself that the word a@aq-Kurm? in- 
stead of being literally translated as ‘tortoise’ should b3 con- 
strued to mean ‘Globe.’ This is further supported by the first 
Sloka of the chapter which starts with nine divisions of the 27 
lunar minsions—each division consisting of 3 stars commencing 
from Krittika, The reader will note that the original divisions 
of the zodiac started from the first quarter of Krittik,, the star 
owned by the Sun, the lord of the nine pianets. 

That our ancient authors went hand in hand with a thorough 
knowledge of the 18 Puranas is another reason for us to interpret 
gi as Globe. For a7%4-Jayadeva, the poet, in his afanmae- 
Gitagovinda, while describing the 10 incarnations of Vishnu as 

qiqad aad Wieggwa 

aa gaa aie saad aaa Baa | 

qised AAA ES Bas Hwaqaeag 

FHWA TUIHUAHA HUA WA AA: W 
observes the Halaait ag ‘ amHazd’ (one who carries the Globe on 
his back) and this interpretation is now taken advantage of. 
Also faravidragzazt t aa faes Te tore aaNhs 

SUA YasesTSI wT ATT ee | 


Aiso compare the following gutta — 
ay Wat ay agai qidaaqat 
gui ad: aggaltieaeneageqaaa: | 
CaRANSHaIIazaga vila sa Wut: 
qlatg: ade: Teeaalear ara: eaegr tt 


160 geeateararay = [Adh. XIV. Sl. 1-4 


The following remarks of Dr. H. Kern on the subject will also 


be of interest : 

‘‘The word Kurma is the specific Sanskrit form of a word once common 
to all Indo-European tongues, viz, Kurma, Lat. culmus, Teuton. Aolm, etc. 
It does not originally denote the ‘tortoise’ itself, but its back, for the proper 
meaning is ‘‘mound, buckle, half-globe, holm‘? Even in Sanskrit, in such 
compounds as Kurmonnata, the word signifies the form of the back of the 
tortoise. At the time when the word Kurma Vibhaga became current, Kurma 
was taken in its proper sense. Yet in later times, they wholly mistook the 
Meaning and made an absurd drawing, representing a tortoise, as if Aurma 
could denote alevel! The rendering by ‘Globe’ is not whollv cvact, since 


a] 


properly only a half-lone, a holm 5 SU pposed to be raised above the waters. 
ATATAT ATA AAA TAT | 
ANAT ASTITATS Asa Tare 1 
Sloka 1—To the nine triads of stars commencing from 
Krittika belong the nine regions of the earth having 
Bharata Varsha as its centre and proceeding thence to 
the East, South-east, etc. 
TAT MTT: | 
alaraeanaaaanaara: (aata: | 
BST al FEASAA AAT BAATT: 
HABA SAMA ALATA WNT AIT } 
qaqa! leq AtaLATasreaze ti 
Uaiwer ea gat aia: Taziarnta | 
ABIDE Blsayl LATA StAANGwA i 
sagra: qRaararat qaraargatra | 
areoqral giza aieat Viena: Brea aA 


ARUAT ASSIA TAA TAL: | 
TSACAAGUTAMNATACAAT UAT 
MYTHISTATIANV Aa Waar | 
WATASHI TST ATA: Ul 
WHISPERS ReHHTT WaT: | 
SIMCOE CURIERIC CECUCCE MCT 


Adh. XIV. SI. 5-10] aggsitseara: 161 


Slokas 2-4—To the central region belong the follow- 
ing ‘:—-Bhadra, Arimeda, Mandavya, Salwa, Neepa, 
Ujjihana, Sankhyata,y Marwar, Vatsa, Ghosha, those of 
the Yamuna and the Saraswati, Mathsya, Madhyamika, 
Mathura, Upajyotisha, Dharmaranya, Surasena, Goura- 
griva, Uddehika, Pandu, Guda, Aswattha, Panchala, 
Ayodhya, IXanka, Kuru, JWalakoti, JXukura, Pariyatra 
mountain, Udumbara, I<apisthala and Hastinapura. 

e ~ 
AY TAA AASTAITTAReAT RTT | 

¢ ees 
STAGAGAHAT AAI AIHA 1M 
SHANA TAT AS TATE AATAT TTA: | 
MISTNATSUS MAR AQTITSUET NE! 
oe SE. Bee tia. nee Con 

SQA TRS RIS (CHB RU AARSATFISE | 
CHITA STRAAGH TAATAT Holt 

Slokas 5-7—-To the east are situated the four moun- 
tains, viz. Anjana, Vrishabhadhvaja, Padma and Malya- 
van ; then the Vyaghramukhas, Suhma, Warvatas, Chan- 
drapura, the Surpakarnas, Khasas, Magadha, Mount Sibira, 
Mithila, Samathata, Orissa, the Aswavadanas, the Dan- 
turakas, Pragjyotisha, river Lauhitya, the milky ocean, 
cannibals, mountain of Sunrise, the Bhadras, Gaudas, 
Paundras, Utkala, Kasi, Mekala, the Ambashthas, the one 
foote.; people, Tamraliptakas, Kosala and Burdwan. 


aazay aiy HraeanszsiqaAasSt | 
sutleranFrg uae ae mrs CRSA Nel 
TIAMG RTT Zig1 arenTeqaaa ag | 
SAAT RAST SAL aera WS 
ees ERAS TTS TTA Gia | 


AE AAMITRWSUT GH Fats uel 
q. u. al 


162 geediterara [Adh. XIV. Sl. 11-16 


Slokas 8-10—In the South east are situated Kosala, 
Kalinga, Vanga, Upavanga, Jatharanga, Saulikas, Vidar- 
bha, the Vatsas, Andhra, Chedi, the Urdhvakanthas, the 
island of Vrisha, Nalikera Charmadweepa, the inhabitants 
of the Vindhya range, Tripuri, Smasrudharas, Hema- 
kudya, the Vyalazreevas, the Mahagreevas, Kishkindha, 
Kantakastthala, the territory of the aborigines, the 
Purikas, the Dasarnas, naked Sabaras and Parna Sabaras 
(Sabaras clothed in leaves). These are the regions 
standing under ths group conm2ncins with Aslesh. 

AY Cara SS Haiaaalenalsra: | 
fitanqauaagiaseqaieeqaeRear: 12 21 
PLORS NATTA ABRARBS AAC | 
MRAM AA ROT NR 
Be icuri rac! ay He ale THB u i ABM | 
Praga anb ole Reayaa | 23 
FATAL TEAAT: | 
smreapenigriPvems FORT Leet 
qari rea ATTA BTA | 
malaeditga ata atea BTA 244 


f~. oN ES 


THAIS SRA ROTA FR | 
PSST FAT ATAMT Aaa [2a 


Slokas 11-16—In the south are situated Lanka, the 
Kalajinas, Saurikeernas, Talikatas, Girinagara,the Malaya, 
Dardura, Mahendra and Malindya hills, the Bharukach- 
chas, the Kankatas, Kankanas, Vanavasi, the Sibikas, 
Phanikaras, Konkans, Abhecras, the nine-region, the Vena 
river, the Avartakas, Dasapura, the Gonardas, Kerala, 
Karnatic, the Great forest, Chitrakuta hill, Nasik, Kolla- 


Adh. XIV. Sl. 17-21]  wagaitswara: 163 


girl, the Cholas, the Krauncha island, Jatadharas, the 
Kaveri, the Rishyamukha (mountain), the mines of Vai- 
durya, conch shells, and pearls, Atri’s hermitage, the 
mariners, Dharmapattana,the islands, Ganarajya, Krishna 
Velluru, the Pisikas, the Surpa mountain, mount Kusuma, 
Tanrbavana, the Karmaneyakas, the southern ocean, the 
hermitages, the Risheekas, Kanchi, Maruchipattana, 
Cheryarynkas, the Simhalese, the Rishabias, Baladeva- 
pattana, Dandaka forest, the whale-eaters, Bhadras, 
Kachchas, elephant caves and the Tamriparni river. 
a 0 . oN nt ~ AN 
amar feta TA WaRrTAaeqaas | 
~ rN C 
ASTM TIGHISAU alae: oll 
~ fm Ly e 4 - 
RT TTAT TAT AMAT UT ITM | 
CA ® 
TAURMAG THOUS NCAFH U2 cli 
~~ ~ > as 
WARM TRMORATHIUSATRAT SF | 
Cant . c «, 
ATA UAT TIA ATOTTSAT © 23M 
Stohas 17-19.——in the southwest, lie the following 
tracts: of the Pallavas, Kambojas, Sindhu-Sauveeras, 
Vadavamukhas, Aravas, Ambashthas, INupilas, Naree- 
mukhas, Anartas, tie Phenagiri, Yavanas, Maryaras, 
Karnapraveyas, Parasavas, Sudras, Birbaras, Muratas, 
KKhandas, Kravyadas (raw-meat-eaters), Abheeras, « han- 
chukas, the Hemagiri, the Indus, the Kalakas, the Raiva- 
takas, the Sourashtras, the Badaras and the Dravidas. 
These and the great ocean stand under the group of 
asterisms headed by Swati. 
ce eee oe é a 
Aa any Hay Tags qaaatisaiae | 
AG TRU ARETATTAURTAIMS Ul ol 
a On x 
GALA STI TIU A(T FAI AR ABA 
«0 Cc ~ ~ ~ 7 
TAHA FVeH Y WAH a 7 22 


164 qeeaitarara [Adh. XIV. Sl. 22-28. 


Slokas 20-21—In the west are the Manimath and 
Meghavat hills, Vanaugha, Mount Kshurarpana, Asthagirt, 
the Aparanthakas, Santikas, Haihayas, Mount Prasasta, 
the Vokkanas, the Punjab, Ramathas, Paratas, Tarakshitt, 
the Jringas, Vaisyas, Gold-Scythians and all the lawless 
hordes of barbarians living in the west. 

fete Waar qoesaqurdiazanz: | 

HMRHGACSSE BlUsIsAataaga!: lle ll 

* ¢ 

TYAA RBYISH YS ACH STATHITA: | 
“A sS Cat a ¢ 

CHAS AAT SHA TARMA zt 

Slokas 22-283—In the northwest are the Mandavyas, 
Tusharas, Talas, Halas, Madras, Asmakas, Kulutas, Hala- 
das, the kingdom of Women, Nrisimha forest, the 
Khastthas, the river Venumatee,the Phalgulukas, Guluhas, 
Marukuchchas, Charmarangas, the one-eyed men, Sulikas, 
Deerghagreevas, Deerghasyas and Deerehakosas 


sata: Karat aay waar Margeata | 
Al AS HATMMAT ATA AT |Rvll 
RRITANATUTAMTTATATAA AT | 
MeMeaMIaadanaa: Agar lll 
HUIS RAAACHAUT TAA AA: 
AMASPHROATHSATH SAAT REI 
AAAS PASANTARSISVVSVNSSHR: | 
AMNESETRSAARACSSTYAGT: 129) 
MeMAVaanaNsisaqwaqnsqyyz | 
ATATAAAs TMAH AAT 1/2 


Slokas 24-28—In the north, lie the mountains known’ 
as Kailasa, Himalaya, Vasumat, Dhanushmat, Krauncha 


Adh. XIV. SI. 29-32] = sazatiseara: 165 


and Meru, the Kuru country (north and south), the 
Kshudra meenas, Kaikayas, Vasatis, Yamunas, Bhoga. 
prasttha, the Arjunayanas, Agneedhras, Adarsas, Antar- 
dweepa, Trigartha, the Turagananas, the Svamukhas, 
Kesadharas, Chipitanasikas (flat noses), Daserakas, 
Vatadhanas, Saradhanas, Taxila, Pushkalavata, Kaila- 
vata, the Kanthadhanas, Ambaravata, Madrakas, Malwa, 
Pauravas, Kachcharas, Dandapingalakas, Manahalas, 
Huns, Kohalas, Seetakas, Mandavyas, Bhutapura, Gand- 
hara, Yasovatee, the Hematalas, Kshatriyas, the Khacha- 
ras, the Gavyas, the Yaudheyas, Dasamcyas, Syamakas 
and Kshemadhurtas. 


Vaal ASRAVUTSTTAMTHTHALT: | 

MAIAIRTFAATREATATZT | V3 

ARIAS AAAS ARATE TT 

Als TWIAAAPFATGAA THAR SA: 113 oll 

la C es 
wHAMGaae aaa Rye | 
TeaaaaaaaATa ls atesa NII 
Slokas 29-51—In the north east are situated Meruka., 

Nashtarajya, Pasupala, [eera, Kashmir, the Abhifaras, 
Daradas, Tanyanas, Kulutas, Sairindhras, Vanarashtras, 
Brahmapura, the Darvis, Damaras, Vanarajya, Kiratas, 
China, the Kaunindas, Bhallas, Patolas, Jatasuras, 
Kunatas, Khasas, Ghoshas, Kuchikas, one-footed men, the 
Anuviddhas, gold' regions, Vasudhanas, Divishtas, Paura- 


vas, people clad in bark, Trinetras, Mount Munja and the 
Gandharvas, 


TATRA? UTES: PAT AAT: | 
Taal aT: Bowe at area NIV 


166 geaigarata,. «[ XIV. 33.—XV.1-3 
~ ° ~~ fC ALA 
MAAsSMAa AY alana Regain: | 
yO = AA 
UST TET AKAs aT Hildegs 1133 
Slokas 82-33—When these groups of asterisins be- 
ginning with Krittika are hurt by mnilefic planets, the 
kings of the following countries will in their order be 
destroyed :—Panchala, Mavajdna, Kalinga, Avantee, 
Anarta, Sindhusauveera, Harancura, Madra and Kuninda. 


Thus ends the 14th Adhyaya on the Divisions of the Globe.’ 


AqaAeqT Wl = Allctment of animate and 
inanimate objects to the several asterisms. 


BRN Oe cos 2k cs ERT 5a SS 7 
HAT ARTA ITA aeAATA ATTN: | 
o~ o, an in Wan: 
MRK AS FISHES TTA 8 | 
Sloka 1.—To \<rithika are assivned: wh‘te flowers, 
Brahmins performing daily Avnihotra, reciters of sacred 
hymns, those who know the sacrficiu rates. oragim irians, 
miners. barbers, Bralunins, potters, pri.sts od vtrolowcrs. 
W077 GAIMA TT TTAG ETT Ric hs? | 
WITT AHIR ASA 4 Aaqitqa emcee 
Sloka 2,—To Rohini arc assigne*: ub. orvers of vows, 
merchandises, kines, wealthy persons, Yoogirs, cartmen, 
cows, bulls aquatic animals, agriculturists, mountains 
and men in authority- 
(eae Bos ™~ ea “7 ee soap aonnagin fw 
AMAT GUAT AG THs ital TUT Ss | 
ba Am ae ees eee ren 
ANAT AME TAGs GATT U1 
Sloka 38, —To Mrigasiras—frazrant things, garments, 
aquatic products, flowers, fruits, gems, foresters, birds, 


Adh. XV. SI. 4-8.]  vazaifseara: 167 


beasts, drinkers of Soma juice, musicians, lovers and 
letter-bearers. 


mi TAT TAT TAI TAT? ee 
ata raai lea TeaT aA ATRIA real 
Sloka 4.—To Ardra—Slayers, catchers, liars, adul- 
terers, thieves, rogues, sowers of discord, husk-grain, 


cruel-minded people, charmers, sorcerers and men versed 
in the art pertaining to goblins. 


Mita aacraragweqaiagsagar: 
SIAIUET ToT TIAA Bassa NWA 
Sloka 5.—To Punarvasu—truthful, charitably-dis- 
posed, pure, high-born, handsome, intelligent, renowned 
and ricn men, valuable grain, merchants, servants 
and artisans. 


ge TAMA aalerrarig alert qT | 

aioalqaiaa: aaa waaay MGI 

Sloka 6.—To Pushya—barley, wheat, rice, sugar- 
cane, forests, ministers, kings, fishermen and the like, 


honest-folk and persons engaged in big and small 
Sacrifices. 


Haga SAAR TonoAeTaM TTT | 
TIAA ATTA TET TATA {N91 
Sloka 7.—To Aslesha—csounterfeits, bulbs, roots, 


fruits, worms, reptiles, poison, robbers, husk- grain andiall 
classes of physicians. 


4 TATEAV Rerneasr gars | 


fagrMatirene: wearer: VBI AAT lel 


168 geeatearara = [Adh. XV. Sl. 9-13 


Sloka 8.—To Magha—people rich in money and 
corn, granaries, mountaineers, men who are dovoted to 
their elders and manes, merchints, heroes, carnivorous 
beings and women-haters. 

MBEAN ATAATIAMeTT VTA | 
HUASINAARASA FATHANT AN 

Sloka 9.—To Purvaphalguni—actors, syoungy dam- 
sels, amiable -persons, musicians, artists, merchandises, 
cotton, salt, honey, oil and boys. 

SIPCUEEICE MIRE CPL CIOCAE DIC iH 
HATUCAMTITHAAT FATA ULell 
Sloka 10 —To Uttaraphaleuni—mild, pure, modest, 


heretical, charitable and learned persons, iine corn, highly 
wealthy men, those intent on their duties and kinvs, 


ZA AARGAUM BATA TTT | 
qTaey TAT TWA TAT 2 2 
Sloka 11.—To Hasta-robbers, clephants, chirioteers 
elephant-drivers, artisans, merchandises, huskesl-grain, 
men versed in the Vedas, traders and energetic men. 
TE VTAMITSSTRTTAEAT ATE | 
TMTATSATAALs ASFA UH AMET 112 Vil 
Sloka 12.—To Chittrampersons skilled in the art 


of ornamenting, jewelry, painting, writing, singing and 


perfumery, as well as mathematicians, weavers, opthalmic 
physicians and king’s corn. 


Mal SUATAU ais TMEAA Tazany | 
HATS YACATM IAL Wagasrey eli 


Adh, XV. Sl. 14-18] TINS CATS: 169 


Sloka 183—.To Swati—birds, beasts, horses, traders, 
corn, such produces of the field as cause flatulence 
(e&, Bengal gram, etc), fickle-minded friends, oe 
characters, a and connoisseurs of wares. 

geqitucad THITRSMT! AaTgat | 
RUAAMTITH FWATEATAH 12 Vit 

Sloka 14.—To Visakha—tree with red blossoms 
and fruits, sesamum, green-gram, cotton, black gram, 
Bengal gram and men devoted to Indra and Agni, 

ban es 
WA MITA WATTHATTASAATAT | 
Y aaay SH al FT WeRAgeTaT Ul 

Sloka 15.—To Anuradha—men of prowess, heads 
of corporations, friends of the good, those delighting in 
assemblies, travellers, honest pzople in the world and all 
things that grow in autumn. 

VeASAM FVAAIMSaAT Wega | 
aaa seg Barat als Aare egy 

Sloka 16.—To Jyeshtha—great martial heroes, those 
that are endowed with noble family, wealth, and fame, 
thieves, monarchs intent on conquest and commandants. 

qa TITAS ol Sole FEASRIUA? | 
iaMaTATH: FBSA F TWA LI 


Sloka 17,—To Moola-medicines, physicians, deacons 
ef corporations, persons dealiny in flowers, roots and 
fruits, seeds, very rich men and those that feed on fruits 
and roots. rs 


AY Bal Tota: TaaaaTT | 


daRraiaiaansggarasganas cit 
TF. 22 


170 aeedtearara §=[Adh. XV. Sl. 19-23 


Sloka 18.—To Purvashadha—tender-hearted men, 
navigators, fishermen, aquatic animals, etc., those whe 
are devoted to truth, purity and wealth, constructors af 
bridges, those that live by water, and aquatic fruits and 
flowers. 

AA ATMAASRCAMATTITRT: | 
SAAT ATTA A ATA AA NASM 

Sloka 19.—To Uttarashadha—mahouts, wrestlers, 
elephants, horses, devotees of gods, immoveables, warriors, 
pdrsons enjoying pleasures and militant —— 


aay aaa fleas Bg Tal: | 
BUSA? TIAL AITAT AMTTALT Rol 
Sloka 20.—To Sravana—jugeglers, the ever-active, 
able, energetic and righteous men, devotees of Vishnu 
and truthful persons. 
Ta Aaryw Hiaaeagiea: at sea: | 
SIAN ATA THAT ATTA TAIT ATMs 1220 
Sloka 21.—To Dhanishtha—men_ without pride, 


eunuchs, fickle friends, men obnoxious to their wives, 
charitable, very rich and peace-loving persons. 


THU Taras Teas 
MARAART MSHA HARA Biseeyz uVUWl 


* Sloka 22.—To Satabhishak—snarers, anglers, aqua- 
tic products and dealers in fish, etc., as well as boar- 
hunters, washermen, distillers and fowlers. 

AS TARIDUIS Aaa aIS AST: | 
¢ 
qadhiven fygguers & AAA: Rl 


Adh. XV. Sl. 24-29.]  varqeitseara: 171 


Sloka 28.—To Purvabhadra—robbers, cowherds, 
murderous persons, niggards, low and false-heasted 
people, those who are devoid of virtue and religious obser 
vances, and those that are clever in duel. 


onieseea faa: sagtadgar aehrat: | 
AAMT WAS ALI ALAIKT FT UA 


Sloka 24.—To Uttarabhadra—Brahmins, those that 
are devoted to sacrifices, charity and penance, very mith 
persons, hermits, heretics, monarchs and valuable corn. 


TU AsSSAThSHAASIMA ASA BHA | 
agent Tea as AEA Rel 


Sloka 25.—To Revati—aquatic fruits, flowers aad 
the like, salt, gems, conch shell, pearls, lotuses, perfumes, 
fragrant flowers, traders and helmsmen., 


AMEAMAAEM AATNATAATHIATTL | 
AWN TAT SITAATEATATAT: REI 


Sloka 26.—To Aswini—horse-dealers, commandants, 
physicians, attendants, horses, horse-riders, traders, hand- 
some persons and horse-grooms: 


WEST SMAAYA BU TAITTSAATH: | 
area atagargal fadiaay acta uel 
Sloka 27.—To Bharani—those that feed on blood 

and flesh, cruel men, slayers, catchers, cudgellers, husk- 
grain, low-born persons and men wanting in character. 
Witt aasarsat cat F WaT aaraey | 
aay aead a ANTI FT Has URI 
MigasMMagsana atsarat vated aia | 
RranMoaTsnls Mega TATYATATs |i 


172 geengarara §=fAdh. XV. Sl. 30-32 


AAT ATNIGLAANA AAAAATETTTATATA | 
ate aa aut aT eRTaTNAAa Ro! 


Slokas 28-30,—The three asterisms Purvaphalguni, 
Purvashadha and Purvabhadrapada as well as Krittika 
belong to the Brahmin class. The three Uttaras along 
with Pushya belong to the Kshatriya class. Revati, 
Rohini, Anuradha and Magha belong to the husband- 
men. Punarvasu, Hasta, Abhijit and Aswini belong to 
the merchant class. Moola, Ardra, Swati and Satabhi- 
shak belong to the powerful class of cruel persons. 
Mrigasiras, Jyeshtha, Chittra and Dhanishtha own the 
Servant class. Aslesha, Visakha, Sravana and Bharani 
belong to the outcasts. 


Rg Teg | 

TEAATTATEN et MTaMAcifed Faq NBL 

agate saad vHlaaraarada at | 
atari Hara aI 11321 


Slokas 31-82.—A lunar mansion is said to be hurt 
when occupied by the Sun or Saturn, when damaged by 
Mars cutting through or retrograding in it, when merged 
in an eclipse, when hit by a meteor, when manifestly 
crushed by the Moon, or in short, when something éxtra- 
ordinary happens with it. All this is destructive to the 
forementioned dependency of the particular asterism, 
whereas the contrary augurs prosperity. 


aM SF SIAT: 
MAMA TAT aes witaaTay | 

aittaraatt Pret anazaa = 
Uguaadiesiagagaageay |, — soon 


Adh. XVI. Sl. 1-5] =- Heatseara: 173 


azo died ae sHawaar eray tt 
aqagas fararaa eta aaa | 
wana fiat qorfa freaqay 0 


Thus ends the 15th Adhyay on the—" Nakshatras”’ 


azalmaim: 2&ll Countries, People, and 
Things belonging to the domain of each planet. 


MEANAIGUMSIFGA: MOqUAa: | 

URATAATITATAVSA AT AT HIeATALS 12 

“\ ran fons an ba ~ 

ARORUTMISH TERIA Fiseqy | 

gaara wag ceas a agatar Nit 

ATTSTATHAN ET ASAT EMSS HT | 

Qe] Tiswonigdarsaranea lll 

SAAMAY CRCAUTAB ATTA TTA | 

CIANFAKTHAVHARTTAATAAATATITTY’ 21 

WMATeTaITHHTATsaINa Aeon | 

SUSU TTA AAAS MAL ABT AMAL ell 

Slokas 1-5.—The Sun presides over the eastern half 

of the Narmada District, the Sone, Orissa, Vanga, Suhma, 
Kalinga, Balkh, Scythians, Yavanas, Magadha, Sabaras, 
Prakjyotisha, China, Kamboja, Mekala, Kirata, Vitaka, 
people in and ovtside mountains, Pulindas, eastern half of 
the Dravidas, the south bank of the Jumna, Champa, 
Udumbara, Kausambi, Chedi, Vindhya forest, Pundra, 
Golangula, Sriparvata,. Burdwan, river Ikshumatee, 
robbers, Paratas, wilderness, herdsmen,.seeds, husk-grain, ' 
pungent substances,.. trees; gold... fire, :poison, - heroes,; 


174 gecitarara, (Add. XVI. SI. 6-8. 


-medicines, physicians, quadrupeds, ploughmen, kings, 
evil-doers, chiefs on march, thieves, sespeats, woods, 
renowned men and men of cruel disposition. 

TUT A BAT: | 


ATE AMT GWOT: AWATATTT: | 
SE ARI: BVH AT ASHI ATA: WAST: 
PTA ASS: YAU: ATTA TAATH TAs: | 
dim: Ga quasar: atdart afeveast: 
AQAA awaISS Srarsagraeiat a } 
farcqizdt @ gosta adarata Téa: 
sivdaatagt Treigs dea a 
SYAMNMAA Fa War: BU ageHmze: 
SFALAT WIT BsWapeswrana4n | 
@at faqar: surava: ager aie 
agra! wast a aed ar Prasat | 
AUMIGATASASA BI WSBT 
wed a fares Gara Fa aaa: | 
Beet West: wat AatasRaarale uv 
PASSE TMAGASH SATRUABTIT: | 
TaaaaRIESMUsaqEMTaSIT: Nl 
UYRAF YAROASTSTTAM ITSM | 
STIR CIEE DPC ICME RACE IWC MU 
OCC UCU CCE TP EIDE E GID EICMEC: WIL i 
TRAITHTBATa WTKR: Nel 
Slokas 6.8.—The Moon presides over mountains, 
fortresses, forts protected by moats, Kosala, Bharukachcha 
the ocean, Romans, Tocharians, Vanavasi, Tangana, 
Hala, Strirajya, the islands of the great ocean, sweet 
things, flowers, fruits, water, salt, jewels, conch shells, 
pearls, aquatic products, rice, barley, herbs, wheat, 


Adh. XVI. Si. 9-15) Sreatrseare: 175 


drinkers of Soma-juice, the #™q kings (in the cycle of 
12 kings, they oecupy the position of one of the hind 
spokes-—Raghuvamsa I[X-15), Brahmins, white objects, 
beloved person, horses, lovers, young women, command- 
ants, eatables, clothes, horned animals, demons, agricul. 


turists, persons acquainted with Sacrificial rules. 
aul A BRAT: | 


Gaal ASTUA SASIAFT TST: | 
MUSA VRSTDA FU Faariaa: 1 
aIras atragreaaraa EGA TSF | 
aia wanta & a aya saqnraa: 1 
WAT Wea: wie GEA Tar aiT 
MAW AAW 4 a aAaeg qwuaayz 
Shanmadaa sraeraraaia a 
faaramaqaesy serait a sata: ti 


sora ancrar aiacarary Teragen: | 
fataeeat araat fort aera aot use 
Weal TA Aaraat eqarsaan: | 
TALIM AS TAAeTASIATITMA|S? M2 oll 
TASASe IAHR AATITHISA AUTH! | 
PATIO SHAN ATS SACI: 12 VI 
aaardinraaaeetassazaram Fa: | 
44 trata qalat adi & ait tadiasaq ea 
TMS URINATE A TATA AATAT AAT | 
metragimazatngraraiearany 112i 
BCTAHINHaN tag Seq aTATTTATT | 
wHnveanagaaqigenadienrang eel 
TATA AHAATHTATT A ATA | 
wsciawaEnyat FT TTargarsharaa: ell 


174 geetearara © [Adh. XVI. S], 16: 


Slokas 9-15.—Mars presides over the people residing 
in the western half of the Sonne, Narmada and Bheema- 
ratha, the Nirvindhya, Vetravatee, Sipra, Godavari, Vena, 
Ganges, Payoshnee, Mahanadee, Sindhu, Malatee, Para, 
Uttara Pandya, those who live near mount Mahendra, 
Vindhya, Malaya, Chola, Dravida, Videha, Andhra, 
Asmaka, Bhasapara, Kounkana, Manthrishika, Kuntala, 
Kerala, Dandaka, Kantipura, Mlechchas, half-castes, 
Nassik, Bhogavardhana, Virata, the countries bordering 
on the Vindhya mountains, people living on the banks 
of the Taptee and the Gumtee, towns people, agricul- 
turists, Paratas, people who live by fire, warriors, 
foresters, fortresses, Karvatas, slayers, murderous men, 
arrogant fellows, kings, boys, elephants, hypocrites, 
infanticides, shepherds, red fruits and flowers, coral, 
generals, jaggory, toddy, cruel men, treasury, keepers 
of sacred fire, mines, Buddhist monks, thieves, rogues 
vindictive and gluttonous persons. 


Sloka 12 is omitted in some editions. 
aa WZ Sy: | 


Hargaecqgear: ar At ASA | 
aeraat adarar drarar: waar fee: 
aiger argon gail qer aaah | 
HeanSat Taso @ warwal Pages: 
USAAISC FACTABASIAAL | 
WATT: FAM FA FSA I 
MITT: TAA BIBT: TATA: | 
gUaarsiagnt F Hae: TyTN tt 
AAAS FAM GEWMATTAT AT: | 
Saw wasarar qWisweraestren t 


Vike Meqags aegareaitar cwarwat. F | 
TRAE Aa AeeRreattas eal 


Adh. XVI. S). 17-20] —- Steattsvara: 1977 


AYN: Wis feaagiaeaPaaHeat: | 
AULATASATA AAAS TAM ATS toll 
SAUAAEAM HIT SCAM TUTTI ITT MATS | 
MSCITST MMT ARATARIT AMT LA 
ATZVIFERM AH UBRATSTABA ALTA: | 
TIAGTRAAT TT AAMTTMs ugau 
ATAPATATHTAA Sati aaa | 
ATALATAARIVATTATIAT Noll 


Slokas 16-20.—Mercury presides over the Lohitya, 
Indus, Sarayu, Gambheerika, Ratha, Ganges, Kausikee 
and other rivers, Videha, Kamboja, the eastern half of 
Muttra, people living in the regions of the Himalaya, 
Gomanta, Chitrakuta, Saurashtra, bridges, water-routes, 
merchandise, inhabitants of caverns, hillmen, water- 
reservoirs, mechanics, songsters, copyists, gem-dyeing- 
perfumery experts, painters, grammarians, mathema- 
ticians, outfitters, preparers of potions securing long- 
evity, artisans, spies, Jugglers, infants, poets, imposters, 
tale-bearers, exorcisers, envoys, eunuchs, buffoons, people 
versed in demonology and magic, policemen, actors, 
dancers, ghee, oil, oilseeds, bitter substances, observers 
of vows, chemists and mules, 


aU A BRIT: | 


Paagzitnd wat Raa Sia ae t 
ayaa WE Aika: Beda au 
meatier FT AY TVA Tsar aT | 
WPUal SACU AIT SABI 1 
SXqr: GAASA: Seitsra Qiivan: 
veaghefadt & @ araPargeea: i 


¥. a. 23 


178 areatgarara [Adh. XVI. SI. 21-25. 


ip wet HTARTTTY et 
a sara: disat: aiagaan frat: 
e 
faeqaeaanh ayUTarsaaaaa | 
x. Con 
MAUS MAsIZ TASATeAT’ Ril 
PATNA TETAS | 
ALAUSAATTAT ASMA UR 
ALAA Mea yTA AAAS RAT | 
RATA M AAT ATAIATATAT? Nil 
C “ n 
TAT TAVSTIAAT ATTA ATAATT. | 
AITAUTHO STATAUATT F (VW 
be. nN (mn n 
Hornatdianwgeaadewais Tay | 
AAMAS WKAs AAA Ul 
Slokas 21-25.—To Jupiter belong the eastern part 
of the Indus, the western half of Muttra, the Bharatas, 
Sauveeras, Srughnas, Northerners, -the Vipasa river, 
Satadru, the Ramatas, Salwas, Trigartas, Pauravas, 
Ambashtas, Paratas, Vatadhanas, Yaudheyas, Saraswatas, 
Arjunayanas, half the rural provinces of Mathsya, 
elephants, horses, royal priests, kings, ministers, people 
engaged in auspicious ceremonies and preparation of 
tonics,’ compassionate, truthful, pure, pious, learned, 
charitable and righteous men, citizens, rich men, gram- 
marians, philologists and vedic scholars, exorcisers, politi- 
cians, royal equipments, umbrellas, banners, chowries, etc, 
benzoin (eur), costus (Gere) Jatamansi(#-7 wre) 
Tahara (sssdenr), quicksilver, Saindhava ‘salt, beans, 
sweet juices, bees-wax and choraka perfume (the husk of 
cardamom known in Tamil as ##Gerau or aa gG ere), 
TUS ETT | Braegardte: cagage alt | 
Quideatarena grasagerera o 


Adh, XVI. SI. 26-30, ) wiezirseara: 179 


UM Tita wet awed TBS Taz | 
sey aa faagrat farataagieeat 0 
PAA TTI Gra sarsar: | 
ATAMA TAS SWAAMEAT AAT Ft 
asqalaga: diet atlagr: ateagar: | 
aidtangGe BAST Sat TAT: I 
aygwaqawmia ramint array ze: 0 
AA ASALARATAT MALATE MTRSTT HT? | 
ASMUSARRATTIAIATTATAT? HATA URN 
4 7 fralea Raita seqartatt = | 
CATT TT RFRCICTA SAT aATT HL <9 
aitgaaigersataamyoeqeaaea: | 
TACT AH ATHTANAATTAM URI 
VA AMSSRYRITGATSIaETAT | 
AFAMAT HI TATTHIAAMPTAMARSs Rit 
AAAS HASTA HUATT AANA | 
Ma RSISTaAAeqyerd FZ YM Rol 
Slokas 26-80.— To Venus belong Taxila, Marthi, 
Kavata, Bahugiri, Gandhara, Pushkalavataka, Prastthala, 
Malwa, Kaikaya, Dasarna, Useenara, Sibi, those that 
dwell on the banks of Vitasta, Iravatee, Chandrabhaga, 
chariots, silver-mines, elephants, horses, elephant-drivers, 
wealthy men, fragrant things, flowers, unguents, gems, 
diamonds. ornaments, lotuses, couches, good bride- 
grooms and brides, aphrodisiacs, those who partake of 
sumptuous and delicious dishes, parks, baths, lovers, those 
endowed with renown, happiness, generosity and charming 


personality, scholars, ministers, merchants, potters, 
(various kinds of) coloured birds, the three fruits, sQ@éerw, 


180 geatgataia [Adh. XVI. S1.31-34 


siehiésru, Osadsart) — wrgev.ois pio, Cuf &ebu ip, 
Arraspeiuypto—silk, wool, bleached silk, Rodhra (@areir der 
Qor é Bins), Patra (@rsugst), Chocha ‘(memaeiur_co), 
nutmeg (gr G4ésrd)), Agaru (@77GH), Vacha (aby), 
Pippili (#4969) and sandalwood. 
AUT A SAT: | 
aqua Raat suradt a rata a | 
OWHUTAA BAL MUTT I 
SMO ASaraasr akesar st 
WN: Beye war: eas @ faaqay ii 
ASIGUuMAAP YR: BAAN: | 
ae age gar: afesraaaiaa: i 
ae witas wisaeT HATS: | 
Pasrossiar Brae Gate Breese: 
facqeqaeeay Taransaaseta F | 
Teaqaa wre Wawa: a: 
| ¢C A rN A 
AAAI RTA TAA ATT HT | 
A TUT TA acaat TAT Sa UAL 
geyiaa: TNT Higa aesal AlaTat: | 
USA SAA aa SHasargenTagEcars WSVk 
‘aN lon CA Av 
TTAMSAMMAPTAASTISM ANAL | 
ant ~~. Cn 
WSIASaaaTatgio-aaTatays IN 
HAAHCALTA ATTRA FATT | 
ATBTAANHAUAS AMAA STAT VIL 
' Sloka 31-34.—Saturn presides over the Anartas, the 
Arbudas, Pushkaras, Saurashtras, Abheeras, Sudras, 
Raivatakas, the country where the Saraswati river disap- 


pears, the western country, the inhabitants of Thaneswar, 
Prabhasa, Vidisa, river Vedasmritee, those who - dwell 


Adh. XVI. Sl. 35-37] weatseara: 181 


along the banks of the Mahee river, rogues, dirty fellows, 
unrighteous men, oil mongers, cowards eunuchs, Jailors 
and prisoners, fowlers, impure fellows, fishers, deformed 
persons, old men, swine-herds, foremen of companies, 
those that have broken their vows, the Sabaras, Pulindas, 
poor men, pungent and bitter things, tonics, widows, 
snakes, thieves, she-buffaloes, donkeys, camels, Bengal 
gram, such grains in pods as cause flatulence and Nish- 
pavas (Quq@wHuw pp). 

AM SF BAT: | 

Sat LATA: Aras Wieser | 

AAA TUAATA! AAT HSAFST tl 

wang fara asaleeatas: | 

Areal Stata Alwas Beatz ti 

SMBAHAT Al: WYAPTABIAAr | 

qreatigaag Saver seat: Wa: HA: 

fea: agiaaia tarcaraansa: | 

gsrqatsr: Vt AeWeaa: Bar u 

WIS! gaa age: Feraraaalsar: t 

SraTTarat geot a ayy: WT: 


~~ nm 


fittaeshahyer sssoa Ta WT | 
WAT RA SHUR MAA IHsSts li 
guitaatanaracmaagazay | 
aatggiadiataraarar ata zeit 
SAT ABUITAAAgS Tea Aq | 
TAT FT AeA ATASAUSITATAL 11) 


Slokas 35-37,.—To Rahu belong the inhabitants of 
mountain-peaks, dens and caves, barbarian tribes, Sudras, 
Jackal-eaters, the Shoolikas, Vokkanas, Kinnaras, crippled 
persons, those who disgrace their lineage, evil-doers, 


182 qeeatgarary [Adh. XVI. SI. 38.39 


ungrateful men, thieves, faithless, dirty and stingy per- 
sons, donkeys, spies, ‘duelists, wrathful persons, children 
in the womb, low people, reprobates, hypocrites, giants, 
all sleepy beings, lawless men, black gram and sesamum. 
aut @ Seag: | 
Sy trartiente ware: geqiaar: | 
ire Fesreagera Tae: TTS: 
wartafadtrara fiftear: seaersrar: | 
AAUGAM EAA IAUBlIAl ALATA: Ut 
fastest MEZA ACMA: TA: | 
war fata a faa ugauadazs ti 
Megha aaT Asa AE TAT | 
AUT AAAS STA ATIBATAT lei 
QUAATATA TEATFTTST ATA: | 
qarantaaittvas Rat: AATSAAT NI 


Slokas 38-39.—Ketu presides over mountain strong- 
holds, the Pahlavas, Swetas, Huns, Cholas, Afgans, 
desert, Chinese, the cavemen, rich men, highly ambitious 
persons, energetic men, those endowed with prowess, 
adulterer, disputants, those that take pleasure in others’ 
misfortunes, persons elated with pride, fools, unrighteous 
people and men desirous of conquest. 

aut A BSA: | 

qateeggar: eRe Rae: | 

saraaanatan wwiagerana 

gat faradtara aaa acrear | 

qratizar arar: Sania faiaisaraz uv 

Ut A CAAA arara t 

artipateyayaga: wadar: War 

angrekezgquamada: sender atarers | 


Adh. XVI. Sl. 40] GisAisearas 183 


sare WAaTa aeatsrat Heww- 
shagaragamatasaagaairerar: Il 

seradagy sterer ataersagucaya: | 

AAT ACS: Alaa atatamesrswtasr: 

fatwa aeradt tarot aor aaaat a areat | 
nwugssRaeaMe|r Hare cage a Ft Rzaraz 
qitassa ofan: soranit deraat; guazaeeq: | 
fac faegitawaie dar Szerear: sre: Seer 
asta Gensstiaiar agiPraarawsseaa: | 
farcqrara AYUIPTAMAaegaeaigqsaarz tl 
Haat aNaAAIMT: Wagan ayUgwUaa t 
Qa: Vay waar faara Sardartawacars 

Rat Whar Aaa aeqrer: ssqarwarsy | 
RIMS ATA UAT BAMA SSI SSA: 

ataat aa Tal No aVTat Aras: Fuse: | 
qrardtaa fafear adt a ait: tear: Feetage i 
wet: Gansertaadiayg awonapesragesgasan: | 
Tagquantgitaaaa TAA: ASA tl 
Ritadt arataaranon aeysaraegueian: | 
STAAIATIBATTA: WAU AA AHA I 


wquaaa a Ravataaary THlareral 

ate a a gat Rardtenmageacas | 
WVAIATA BANG: Daazatlaa: 

a wala faa ast ay: atatlada: heels 


Sloka 40.—A planet proves beneficent to those whose 
lord he is declared to be, if at rising, he be large, of glossy 
raysand in his natural state, if no portentous thunder, 
meteors, dust or planetary conflict annoy him, and when 
he is-posited in his own house, has reached his exaltation 
point and is aspected by benefics. 


184 geaigarara [XVI. 41-42.-XVII 1. 


atieaaiasad qagaaess acaitaze: | 

SALAIMAGUAAT ATITTA Waled TWiaaTs (18 Vl 

ait a figad aa aunt aarad raat at | 
lon ¢ ~ 

Wala TAIGA FATT MAAATAGTIg ATT VR 


Slokas, 41-42.—If a planet shows signs contrary to 
the above-mentioned ones, his dependency will decay ; 
people and kings will feel sad, be suffering from battles, 
unsafety and disease. If no danger awaits the kings 
from their foes, surely, it threatens them from their own 
sons or ministers) Moveover, in consequence of drought, 
the country-people will frequent towns, mountains and 
rivers which they had never visited before. 

aut aaa: | 

faraigaamed safacua at ae: | 

Teqarsiyataatdesrraea: i 

aq yar aiauinent Raa aaests ary 

feya: qungee: @ ysoia wwe tt 

MAAN ela al TAA SUT I 

TUN WAT: MRVAINATIUA: Ui 


Thus ends the 16th Adhyaya onthe ‘Planets and the coun- 
tries, etc. presided over by them.’ 


 WRZTTEATA: WR! Planetary Conflicts. 


‘Og BI at aT aPasTNTay Fares: | 
aaa Bt TAT SF aafiaieana kd 
Sloka 1.—How and when a conflict of the planets 
will take place according to the teaching of the sages who 


Adh, XVII. SI. 2-3.] —- @raeitssara: 185 


know the past, present and future has been explained by 
me in the (astronomical treatise, viz.) Pancha Siddhantika 
on the lines of the Suryasiddhanta. 


fata acai KETO TA Ta eM ATA ARTA 
afagugtar aaaaa THATATATY RU 
MATRA PASAAIAT AAS | 

Te VaTHt TITER uz 


Slokas 2-8.—The planets movein the firmament 
with their orbits lying one over another, but, owing to the 
great distance, they appear to our eyest o move on one 
even surface. According to the degree of their (seeming) 
approachment, there are four kinds of conflicts as stated 
by Parasara and other sages, viz. Wa-Bheda (occulta- 
tion, cleaving), 3&@-Ullekha (grazing), #gata-Amsu- 
mardana (clashing of the rays) and #qvaea-Apasavya 
(passing southward) 

AA A TUTAT: | agen wsaaatafa | weqe 
agffianrada Hust: | aat qarqal avtary | 

aye S Ta: 1 

area trad Sa ihaatada @ | 

RIAs TEM a aqal FTweaa i 

Ut GT BIG: | | 

aantra: witereamee wWers: j 

arta efeattal @ sfiat asx: tae: 0 

ais aaTMAe BS BeraAa: | 

wat ant. weet aatsathearfirar: a 

TIFUT GEMS wewd gagieaar: | 

| WRlqwatgagiarraas sarge: 0 

TAH: ereatsiy YS a Fefteftore, fi 


€.%. 24 


186 aeeaigarara [Adh. XVII. Sl. 4-5 


Utpala writes thus: 4% neguacdsiaraiza sya a 

Wa: | naearaiedeygeraa ge ara aa aes wee azaqitaaerd: 

fat @ SHE: 1 Aaa wAaMaagqat feouat wet aga | Aer- 

BRUM anawtgaged: Wear waa: ager fageqara ga 
Beard atyatag |} 

‘The Apasavyam or Asavyam Yuddham takes place when the interval is 


somewhat less than a degree; at a greater interval there is no conflict 
at all.’’ Dr. Kern. 


ba’ ~ «& ® 
We aera Ha: geet aerporat 4 | 
boa’ e PrP SN Can = 
VSG THAT Weary: Haracay lvl 
‘A AN C 
APA Fit ual WASEATAATL | 
a \ ms Can 
Bs AWcaqTISy WAT TRA YTTATT MI 
Slokas 4-5.—At the occurrence of an occultation, 
rains will fail and discord will prevail among friends and 
powerful families. When planets graze each other, there 
is danger from the sword, dissensions among royal coun- 
cillors and dearth of food. At a clashing of the rays, there 
will be war between kings and desolation by sword, 
disease and famine. At the avasta-Apasavya conflict, 
their will be hostile encounters between monarchs. 
Utpala says: avaea: sqiater seed | aa Hear sero at- 
aeqaaTasagead | aaa BeRNTEAAITa Byasasayt Bi | 
wats aegztes gate | (XVILI-8 infra.) 

Dr. Kern adds—''This is not difficult to understand, for the Moon leav- 
ing, in her eastward course, a planet or star at her own right (¢. e. standing 
north from the planet or star), may be said to make a pradakshina ; standing 
to the south, 4. ¢e., leaving a planet or star at her left,she makes an apasavya. 
Thus Apasavya means ‘‘from the left, at the left,’’ and, in a special appli. 
cation, ‘‘at the south side ;’’ but from this, it does not necessarily follow 
that apasavya originally was simply the opposite of Savya, ‘‘left''. Yet 
it cannot be doubted that they have taken apasavya as the reverse of Savya, 
or, in other words, that apa was understood to mean, not ‘‘from the side," 
but ‘not ;’’ therefore asavya was considered to Be simply synonymous with 


apasavya. Moreever, Savya has got the meaning of ‘‘right,'’ precisely the 
reverse of its most common acceptation, vis, ‘‘left.’’ 


Adh. XVII. Si. 6-8]  @rqattsvara: 187 


Not to be confounded with this acceptation of Savya is its use in augury. 
Applied to augural birds, etc., Savya is strictly and properly ‘‘left,’’ but as 
birds first appearing from the left of the observer move in the direction of 
his right, and keep him at their own right, s'vya, ‘‘left,’' and pradakshina, 
«moving to the right,'’ imply the ‘same, without being the same. Utpala 
remarks ; 


ad wa aera qeqaraqsarana aaa sWanweaosatea 
Bq AAA ASIA | TAHA TeNTAaAgMaIgnal aaeTASTA| 


In astronomical works, Savya ‘‘moving (revolving) toward the right’'’ and 
Apasavya ‘‘moving toward the left, 1s common enough ;e. g. Surya Siddha- 
nia xii—55; Siddhanta Siromani, Goladhyaya 3—51, Arya Bhatiya IV—16. 


vlacimeat Wea Tie: Tasqe Raat arat | 
qr Tagqedast Pret atataaes: Net 
PASAUTSTAR Asa TI Tal Tal segs | 
MReTAMMANU AIal AAT: BATA [9 


Slokas 6-7—The Sun when standing in the meridian 
is called ammeq-Akranda, 2. e., an ally coming to the 
rescue : when in the east, he is a W-Paura, ¢.¢, a king 
staying in town; in the west, he is a 4f4i-Yayee, a king 
who marches off. Mercury, Jupiter and Satarn are 
always Pauras, while the Moon is always Akranda. 
Ketu, Mars, Rahu and Venus are marching planets.. 
All the planets known as the Akranda, Yayee, and 
Paura when hurt, will :destroy severally kings coming 
to the rescue, marching and staying in town. In the 


case of their being victorious, they bestow victory on their 
own class of kings. 


Ge Teor eat Fre Fray aaaAea 
UT AIHA ATTA VATA Uc 
Sloka 8 —When a @it-Paura planet is overpowered 


by another of the same description, kings keeping the 
town will'kill others in the same predicament. The same 


188 geeaitarara [Adh. XVII. SI. 9-10. 


applies to af and wreez planets and kings. In case of 
a conflict between Wit and arfy planets, that which is 
victorious will bestow victory on its own class of kings. 


afanizeey: wedi daycare ahageisy: t 
aieeet Raa att Raorg a: a ras kU 

Sloka 9.—A planet is defeated when he is standing 
south, rough, quivering, retrograding without actually 
coming in contact with the other, small, mounted upon, 
of unnatural appearance,without brilliance and colourless. 

Parasara adds aed or struck. 

TUS que) eafweatste Ha faeara frat: aes: 
Qual atearsaiedishwest ead fasasiagatssca  fargar 
aaa vega ard | 
aa amit «=o ataelita: gar: Tee: Aya Ta a 

ATasATal AA ABFA AAAI Ui 

SYa: LUA aa aaeasaaMla a | 

fasaat fagaaly aeaigaa a: 0 

waata ar fazer at aga: Hen Ta aI 

wat: GarMatE fares ti 
saARiasaraeral TINT Fes: | 
fags: fava gina siariteeaisit qaqa: 112 on 


Sloka 10,—A planet not possessing the above 
‘characteristics should be considered as victorious, ¢.¢., 
when it is large, glossy and brilliant, even though 
stationed in the south. 
amaat: | | gitar whaarre: cae tras: | 

WETTIG A: Ae Ne wT H 
saranhee aa nearge auia | 
area sire faeurge seaATe 4 
aut s geared: | ad sity sqeer afenitead wat ge: u 


Adh. XVII. SI. 11-14] aegatsvara: 189 


aft aqagat Ager Rast cara aaa: | 
TArAea wlatataraneqwaay 2 2 


Sloka 11.—When two planets at conjunction are 
radiant, large and glossy, they are said to be in love with 
each other, and the same will be the case with the parties 
denoted by them; while in the contrary case they 
destroy those who belong to their own party. 


YE AAMT T BAI Asada: | 
Ot PIAA an aeasam Aiassaq 22 


Sloka 12,.—If, owing to the indistinctness of the 
indications, it cannot be made out whether a conflict or 
a conjunction is taking place, the effects concerning the 
potentates on earth are said to be equally uncertain. 

4@-Yudda-war is among the non-luminaries while garra-Sama- 
gama is between the Moon and one of the non-luminaries, Some- 


times a conflict may take place without bringing out the conqueror 
clearly owing to both the planets being equally radiant, etc. 


yom rasatiaa ager anaaisiaraies | 
masa Bea: Blowareay Tereq 231 
aoe Aa aad Te ATT aizha | 
PGMS STATA WRT 29H 


Slokas 13-14—When Mars is defeated by Jupiter, 
the Bahlikas, chieftains marching off and people living by 
fire will be destroyed. When he is defeated by Mercury ; 
the Surasenas, Kalingas and Salwas will suffer, When 
defeated by Saturn, kings staying in town will be vic- 
torious, but the subjects will come to grief. If he be 
defeated by Venus, granaries, Mlechchas and Kshatriyas 
will suffer. 


ears ake NRE me 


160 geeaigatarg [Adh, XVII. Sl. 15-20 


EP ectptdar abet 


aaa ct ait aaataraasarene | 
saeqeyn Matigary aearsaraed 24 
oS “ \y san 
To Ha Fy tes TR AIHA: | 
AAT Ves BETA A ANT 12S 
Wasa TY ae aaa: | 
ayo Pasha: aeareagaalasta: got 
Slokas 15-17.—When Mercury is beaten by Mars, 
trees, rivers, ascetics, th: Asmakas, kings, northerners, 
and persons performing sacrificcs will suffer. When he 
is defeated by Jupiter, the barbarians, Sudras, thieves, 
rich ‘men, citizens, Trivarthas and Parvateeyas come to 
grief and there will be an earthquake. If Mercury be 
defeated by Saturn, sailors, soldiers, aquatic products, 
rich men and :preynant .women will suffer. When he is 


overcome by Venus, fires will break out and corn, clouds 
and marching kings will be ruined. 


aia amitaed eaameaaRaA aE | 
UAT TA TSI Ta: Aatfa Pieweq lch 
aida ea Sha Heat Tay avssaT Ta: | 
PUM ISCICCERRCKIPRICULIEE EE etl 


~~ FN 


qareaaals Ga Weta tSesTa TAA! | 

sTaied qeatag apa aq aiBRsyT llRo!l 
Slokas 18-20.—When Jupiter is vanquished by Venus, 
the Kulutas, Gandharas, Kaikayas, Madras, Salwas 
Vatsas, Vangas, cows and corn will be destroyed. When 
he is defeated by Mars, the middle country, kings and 
cows will suffer. When he is defeated by Saturn, the 
Arjuriayanas, Vasathees, Yaudheyas, Sibis, and Brahmins 
will suffer. When by Mercury, the barbarians, truthful 


Adh. XVII. Sl. 21-26] @eeattsvara: 191 


men, swordsmen and the middle country will be ruined. 


This affects also those described in Adhyaya XVI— 
21-25 supra, 


Th weenatad wal ww araygaania | 
FARA Also Fa waa lie 8il 
RASHSEAIRT AAT AeA HeTeyyars | 
aedt asta det aaa Weary [Rl 
BUAtAd WIAA TYwVIAa aATARAT | 
aera Wadia: AearanseTgsy [23 
axa faa Aha age: Tada: AAT | 
aoa fadierd area abanaareaq Rv 


Slokas 21-24.—When Venus is defeated by Jupiter, 
the marching chieftain will meet with ‘his end ; discord 
will arise between Brahmins and Kshatriyas, and there 
will be no rain; the Kosalas, Kalingas, Vangas;, Vatsas, 
Mathsyas, the middle country people, eunuchs and the 
Surasenas will suffer severely. When he is defeated by 
Mars, commandants of armies will be slain, and kings 
will wage war. When defeated by Mercury, the Parva- 
teeyas will be lost ; there will be no milk-supply and rain 
will be scarce. When he is defeated by Saturn, foremen 
of corporations, military men, Kshatriyas and aquatic 
animals. will be afflicted. Moreover, the general effect 
mentioned in Adhyaya XVI—26-30 will take place. 


ara fret Preasrefgetthecaitat ser | 

fufsda agmedteenterctetarany Ul 

Seta TY HeSHAAPTEHTTAT | 
 aearcaed Tear Sagar aernaary [eG 


192 qeeaigaraa “XVII. 27, XVIII. 1. 


Slokas 25-26.—When Saturn is subdued by Venus, 
prices soar up, snakes, birds, and proud men suffer. Like. 
wise, the Tangana, Andhra, Udra, Kasi and Bahleeka 
countries will come to grief when Saturn is overcome by 
Mars. When he is defeated by Mercury, the Angas, 
merchants, birds, cattle and elephants suffer ; and when 
defeated by Jupiter, countries where women are predomi- 
nating in number, the Mahishakas and Scythians will be 
afflicted. 


a4 aisha carat gaganitaPratrararg | 

KS FT Wea TeAHatseagqyt Tat Alea Tats amt: | 
Sloka 27.—Thus have been described the special 

effects of the defeat of Mars, Mercury, Jupiter, Venus and 

Saturn. The other—viz. general—effects are to be deter- 

mined from the previous Adhyaya. The more any planet 


is stricken, the more will he ruin al! that belongs to his 
department. 


QU ST TaN: | 

NEM A TWA Kal: WIA: Hensel a Ta al 
AMT RA AAU wales ae Tagqeqgreai: ti 
Thus ends the 17th Adhyaya on ‘Planetary Conflict.’ 


VIMATATTATTATA: <I Conjunction of 
the Moon with planets or stars. 
Meat AWHUATTTAAT Wa Ae AWS ay Taw | 
Te TRASH WEI Bea a fees Tarws zhi 


Sloka 1.—The Moon moving (more or :less)to the 
north of the stars or planets wherever possible, ¢.¢., keep- 


Adh. XVIII. Sl. 2-4] wergeftseara 193 


ing them to her right side, augurs prosperityto mankind. 
If she goes in the opposite direction, it is not auspicious 
to them. 
at @ RT 
qianarqgasy cate ae Tara | 
nent aexqr Hat awant ave an 
AAU GT TFT: 
ARAN ASOT Al AIT TAIT: away t 
aIg*AnNas AaAA_IeT I 
AMAIN Wert ar ag aiamnar TAL! 
aqasy ada caragieuawang v 
TZ Bie FTA meqgeTaaaasasAt wa: | 
aia: waea aa rar aitaragigar TTT Ul 
Sloka 2.—If the Moon moves to the north of Mars, 
the Parvateeyas and mighty men will be victorious ; 
Kshatriyas and marching kings will be cheerful and the 
earth will rejoice in the abundance of corn.” 


TUT? PII BAF: Weaaga qaney | 
TUIY HVA Taare Baa F aTeyrdiaryz Ul 
Sloka 8.—The Moon moving to the north of Mercury 
brings victory to the kings in the town, confers plenty 


of food and corn, happiness on people, and influx of 
wealth to the treasuries of kings. 


TENTS TT THE TATA AAAS TAT |! 


qHa TIA F HeqTMA Vs: aad Beare wsTey Wel 
Sloka 4.—When the Moon is to the north of Jupiter, 
kings guarding towns, Brahmins, Kshatriyas, scholars, 
righteousness and the middle country will thrive ; there 
will be plenty of food and the ~~ will be iapoy. 
q. G25 


194 aneeigarara [Adh. XVIII. Sl. 58 


aaa ae aways Tal RagHaaaisaye: | 
aaat a Asa gasaat Tears sear gar il4l 
Sloka 5.—When the Moon is to the north of Venus, 
hoarders of wealth, elephants and horses will flourish, 


archers and marching chiefs will conquer and the crops 
will be at their best. 


vata Tat aefat galkequpzat za: | 
TRUMSHAYIRA TRIM Aaa? walerar: (leit 
Sloka 6.—Should the Moon move to the north of 
Saturn, sovereigns keeping the town would triumph, and 


the Scythians, Bahleekas, ‘Sindhus, Pahlavas and 
Yavanas would be joyful. 


Ages wet asariaterzas | 
TReAMaTAPHeATY Fs aeetxa Hea ana iol! 


Sloka 7.—If the Moon move to the north ofa star 
or a planet, herself refnaining unhurt, she benefits the 
substances, kings in town or marching chiefs as the case 
may be, and the countries assigned to the particular star 
or planet. If on the other hand she moves to the south 
offthe same, she destroys the above-mentioned belongings. 


afar negate TrUTIee 
wate aeraea aaa Taigy | 
efa afsanarn: aifsar azgntt 
aay aala ae Talara Ee: cil 
Sloka 8.—All the .effects announced in the case of 
the Moon standing north of a planet become nullified 


when she stands south. Thus have been described the 
Moon’s conjunction with stars and planets. There is 


Adh, XIX. ] qerendertsvara: 195 


absolutely no fight between the Moon on one side and a 
planet or a star on the other. 


RUssarsiqeeyary: | 
feaaaioraaa: aaa: wtaagizararay | 
egararat qa faedseaqicagqerag u gia 
VASAT TATA FX irwaraar qa: | 


Thus ends the 18th Adhyayaon “ the Conjunction of the 
Moon with the Planets or Stars.” 


TATHSEAT: IZA The years presided over by 
each of the planets and their results. 


Utpala has made the following remarks ; 


SEQ TEM Seneay ateaia gargaa net waeaia | aa 
MAIN Yara Sagas | TaTaaneasraTy 

qq WU HS AA a Wlaitanretseg | 

aagtdas Qrerosiraitart u gia- 


It will thus be seen that Varahamihira fulfils the promise he 
had made above (in the Panchasiddhantika), by ‘treating of this 
subject in the present work, Dr. Kern remarks in his foot notes:-— 

‘It is not known which source has been chiefly used by our author in 
this particular instance ; thus much, however, is certain, that long before 
his time Greek horoscopy had been introduced into India,”’ 

By gfasita, Varahamihira certainly refers to Garga, Para- 
sara and a host of other Hindu astrologers {as he shas consistently 
been doing in all his works. No doubt, Yavana lived before 
Varahamihira and that Greek astrology was not unknown in India 
in his time. But to say that this idea about Varsha and Masa 
Phalas has been introduced into India by Yavana is ‘certainly in- 
correct as sages who lived in India ages before have freely spoken 
about these. It may safely be said that ancient sages of India like 


196° . qedfrarara  [Adh. XIX. Sl. 1:3 


Garga, Parasara, etc., have known all about these and that 
Varahamihira perfected all these things in his Samhita as promised, 
knowing also that Yavanacharya also has known all about these. 


It may not be out of place to bring to the notice of the readers | 
that Maharshi Parasara, the father of the celebrated Vyasa, popu- 
larly known as 42@414-Vedavyasa, existed far before the advent 
of Kali (ais), that is, the fourth millennium B.C., and that for a 
sage of this repute, it is not correct to conclude that Parasara had 
to learn everything from ‘the West. What I want to impress is 
that our ancient sages who were founders of the Six Angas (#39) 
of the Vedas, did not require any foreign agency to put them in the 
way, but that they were in themselves, each a mine of knowledge. 
Further, to support my statement that Indian culture existed 
earlier than the Greeks, I quote below the following line from 
Raghuvamsa :—~- 

WaNGaMat Ae AYAT Aa: 
c oe “ 
aaqT Waa Faria 
a A. 
aafguglagatsaarzania | 
a’ e 
AIA ta (2 Va: AAT Baled 
“ rr “~ 
VAI FT Tatlaqaifetaey Ue 
° “ 
aint aqerietas: riaesht Bre 
“ oO 
MAG WEFASTSAPARAT | 
ACTAANTA AR TAA 
~~ 
Vigied atagellas aTHey II 
N 
ATAU AACATASo IAT 
~~ a 
AMAA ATISllaTaatled | 
* Can bes 
Hea YT BA FUGA FUP 
qaeat ane fasq ares lal 
Slokas 1-3,—The state of things in a year, month or 
day presided over by the Sun will be as follows: every- 
where, the earth is covered with very little crop, the 


Adh. XIX. S). 4-5, ] eerenteirsvara: 197. 


forests are infested with voracious tusked animals as a 
Visitation ; very little water flows in the rivers ; medicines 
do not show their usual potency. Even in winter, the 
Sun burns scorchingly; clouds, thoush big as 
mountains, do not pour forth sufficient rain. Fhe Moon 
and the cluster of stars in the sky lose their brilliance. 
Groups of hermits and cattle languish. Monarchs with 
irresistible forces consisting of elephants, horses and foot- 
soldiers, with their followers and with an excellent arma- 
ment of bows, swords and clubs go about destroying the 
lands by war- 
aul qaqa | 
MSA BVANTAlta aeeeararaa HATA | 
aaa aearaharge adraeuaagiega a tt 
fearecsd witanginitreiurveiaraasaiia: | 
MAY SFA SAaTasy ATMA MT: U 
AM A AAA Aaaney | 
Goss: META WaA a staaca«: | 
AFMSATAIMAT WEBUST WSS: I 
mare ~ A 
sqlq aA? Talwarawalaara- 
SHBIAAM SNAG Gara? TAI | 
Tl Wat giaaaTaiNts- 
VHRSHaA YW Aaa AeA? ivi 
aay TapIISaeaAia 
HOLA egisaieaie | 
TMT: ATA TAA ATTA 
Tal TART Taaea Tag | 
TMYAMSIT ATTA 
“ 
A Tea TAR TERTTIAT | 


198 qeedigarary [Adh. XIX. SI]. 6«7./ 
naam eeenemmemmmnemmeenmmmmemeememn era eneen nen ie anee  , O 


Manga aqahegearat 
aaeat PeeaeaaerTs 141 


Slokas 4-6.—-During the year presided over by the 
Moon, the sky will be covered with clouds which resemble 
moving mountains, which show the dark hue of snakes, 
collyrium, bees and buffaloes’ horn, and which fill the 
whole earth with pure water and the quarters with a deep 
sound that creates pangs of separation in the minds of 
Jovers. The water-sheets are decked with lotuses and 
lilies, the trees are blossoming and the bees humming in 
the parks ; the cows yield abundant milk, and !charming 
ladies increasingly delight their handsome lovers with 
amorous sports. (Kings rule over the earth rich in wheat, 
paddy, barley, Kalama rice and plantations of sugarcand, 
and in towns and mines marked with sacrificial altars and 
resounding with the noise of great and small sacrifices, 


ScHwSda is another reading for sHuSsaa- 
AU ST TTA: | 
AATCAANF TATA ASTYEAY TTT: | 
waGheeInasaMeal waatgartassy: tt 
am @ anradigaw(g | 
agaviiaaaa vat atin; | 
WAS: SANA AACA AS: Ul 
aaigaaela afeeraraset 
memeaaia aU a alegTee: | 
Ra SEAMNTTAVA Wied 
Riaiga Raat ga aera: leit 
aan fate aeaqaaistt 
Qaeda BUTT TAC WET | 


Adh. XIX. SL. 8:10] srafesirsvara: 199 


ana Aaaaly aragaa wa 
STATA sled lc 
qT + araqataneaaataan 
PacaqVeTyTA BATT: | 
awed wala WTA 
qacarsaiaaa feraqaar sit 
Slokas 7-9.—In the year presided over by Mars, 
most violent fires roused by the wind spread out threaten- 
ing to consume villages, forests and towns; crowds of 
men ruined by the inroads of hordes of robbers and 
bereft of their properties and cattle cry out ‘alas, alas’, 
throughout the land. The clouds, although bulky in 
appearance and piled up will not let loose anywhere 
much water. Even the crops that grow in the low-lying 
lands wither out. Even if it should bear fruit, it will be 
forcibly taken away by robbers. Kings do not attend 
whole-heartedly to their governing duties. Bilious diseases 
prevail ; there will be trouble from snakes. Mankind 


whose crops have failed will be thus afflicted by various 
calamities. 


AM AT Aaqas: 3 
wiquvg: fiadserae fagenantz rast: | 
AFUBST: TLTMMauas aay Te ee: 
aa @ aaraaearaia | 
altaaeaitinred qTaagagras: | 
TARAS ARTAst Wlareg asx WAT tl 
MARA SHCWS CATT 
en “A an 
WeSeaTioqaraaat aq ze: | 
fiatea qraaisgaqaana 
feeatta aSacartr aeatear loll 


260 | queditarara (Adh. XIX. Sl. 11-13 


aTa Saeahamt Raat wal a 
aaa aalts reais: | 
qeqaraaiaaeansl By- 
areata TO TeAteATAT 18 81 
SATA HAaTISATAH at 
raat 7 | 
ang atid TIsEsAT: Bases 
AASTA TATA BY saedtarq W2AM 
Slokas 10-12.—If Mercury be the lord of the year, 
month or day, men proficient in the art of jugglery, 
enchantments and magic, mines, townspeople, musicians » 
painters, accountants and military men will thrive; kings 
will desire to exchange beautiful things creating joy 
among themselves with the idea of cultivating friendship. 
Rearing of cattle, trade, and husbandry will thrive 
through honesty. ~ Vedic studies will b2 in a state of per- 
fection. Justice will be administered scrupulously by kings 
as by Manu himself. Some will apply their mind to 
Yoga Vidya and others desiring the highest state to the 
science of logic. Jestlers, envoys, poets, children, eunuchs, 
perfumers and those that live near bridges, water and 
mountains will be happy. The earth will abound in herbs. 
aU A YAU: | 
aeaqrarasaa: ferara: arearadiaawdtigara: | 
MU Veraqaaay aa: qeagadatssg: 
aa @ qulaaigarary | 
nea aaiat saat a serfazy | 
giangissd) dbreg waeizaee: fray ti 


eqhredtaiserr amet get aggat sata Req | 
arcaity esraaat eraraeqadiseqatr aan 2A 


Adh. XIX. Sl. 14-18] qerafieettseara: 201 


faernTaTAH STITT ITSTGSTAA | 
fufttkitnearrg aaeafesar aar Panis een 


fafvafiagaa: valddagdl waaaarais: | 
UAT Za I a agaar Miaeraigger ei 
Slokas 13-15.—{In the auspicious year presided over 
by Jupiter) the deep sounds produced in sacrifice by the 
great priests chanting Vedic hymns go up to heaven 
continually rending the hearts of evil spirits and delighting 
the hearts of the Gods partaking of the offerings. ‘(The 
earth is so full of excellent crops, so teeming with 
elephants, horse and foot, so stored with wealth and large 
herds of cows, and so prosperous owing to the protection 
of her rulers, that her people seem to vie with the denizens 
of heaven. The sky is covered with numerous towering 
clouds that regale the earth with water. (The earth will 
be blessed with plenty of corn and great prospetity. 
AU FT Bara: | 


qragearawsan ates ad qaqisaata | 

MMA AUATAASA J: ASATAIATSET: Ul 

aul a quiqaiwararg | 

agamsiaaag tharsrateaaw | 

Geqwyitsgl agawng: fra: 
Teigaals an aoa aaaisaar ase 
aaatieetargaerrain Baa acataarahtetars 
aa faa aftayheantragggqernmaaecataag 
aeelaesageacant at Ts MATAT THUS It 


adiaa wg aat ae Siiteliisihaa aac aroatony | 
arasrastahaggemas: Tees fae ATTA TATTTG: 


x. & 36 


202 qeeaitarara [Adh, XIX. SI. 19-21. 


Slokas 16.18,—[n a year presided over by Venus, 
the earth will abound .in rice and sugarcanejits surface 
will be filled with water poured out by clouds resembling 
mountains ; it will be studded with tanks whose water 
is decked with beautiful lotuses and thus it will shine like 
a damsel with her Jimb dazzling through fresh ornaments. 
The kings will smash the mighty hosts of enemies 
making the quarters resound with the loud cries of victory. 
And the kings will rule over the earth rich in towns, 
mines and good people that are contented ; and all bands 
of wicked persons will be annihilated. In the vernal 
season, young men will drink frequently wine with their 
beloveds ; people constantly will sing melodiously to the 
accompaniment of flute and lute. Men will dine often 
with their guests, friends and ‘relatives ; and the cries of 
victory of the God of Love will be heard everywhere. 

TM A AAAAT: | 


GURACICFEUTAAT: TSTAMLATACTST: | 
sraneia: RAG) Arete WimisHATIAQIaIssz: I 
aut a qaradfearaig 


AAR TAU Tarast agas: | 
araatt erg: era faarsat araTae: 1 


VITAMAYRET GSTs TIVITAHIATAINHANS | 
eunEaTgaIsay Uilamgsgaikt TATA ANS 
TMACATAMAMATAACAM STAT FT qs As | 
ALTRI BUM ATMSTATIaAA Ta aaaaeanaagesy: 
mana graqaaaan Araara geaqaitiaatzalt 
aaa ATMA TAIT (aretgaay aat ATA | 


Slokas 19-21 *-In a year presided over by Saturn, 
the country will be torn-by many battles of : unruly bands 


Adh, XIX. SI. 22.]  qerafauttssara: | 203 


of robbers, will be deprived of cattle and - properties 
and whole families will cry piteously owing to the 
murder of their near and dear ones and be oppressed 
by fell diseases and hunger. The sky will be bereft of 
clouds being chased by the wind ; all the trees with their 
branches broken down will cover the earth. The sky will 
not be illuminated by the rays of the Sun and the Moon, 
since it is covered with a dense mass of dust. Tanks 
and lakes will dry up; and the rivers will become very 
shallow. In some parts, the crops will perish for want of 
water, in others, they get on being watered by artificial 
means ; and the Rain-god yields but little rain. 
Tal @ Waa: 


quistas: sautiaattiaqaaegateatardten: | 
WIBFMATANIFS: Waatdssg: TYR: 11 
aut a aaaafaraa 
ghiaare trig eerie vat aur | 
Mearissa arate fangiaa waaay u 
ARAN Gsvaquiaary & | 
HS TELA AEF ASYHEY ATT I 
AMISATAL AraASHAlsa aT 
TUBSHSTIA GSTIsaS-TTT Ts | 
TEYARYAS ATT TA Ia! 
BURSA As qeqysAeTAaTAy UR 


Sloka 22.—-If a planet be small, with faint rays, be 
posited in his depression house or be overcome by another, 
he will not give any good result. lf he be otherwise 4: ¢., 
big, with brilliance, posited in a good house, or be 
victorious in war, he will confer great prosperity. If the 
lords of the year and the month be both malefic, then 


204 queiiverar, = fAdh. XX. SI. 1-2. 
Oa te ee 


their evil effects will be aggravated in the particular 
month. On the other hand, if both be benefic, the good 
effects will be heightened. If one of them be good and 
the other bad, the result will be trifling. 

aur & gaa: 

avt atgit: gs Ge atefa Waa | 

faaua aniae adaratzarasa | 


Thus ends the 19th Aduyaya ‘‘on the years presided over by 
the several planets.” 


WIFTRENT: (Roll The Planetary Triangle. 


aat Ri card atea qraget Ua aa | 
wala aad RA TargaTHITTaTIx: UR 
Sloka 1.—The direction in which all the non-lumi- 
naries are sighted after their emergence from the Sun of 
are eclipsed by the Sun will be afflicted with famine, war 
and diseases. 
AUT A BAT: | 
afugaea: at Taras Tat | 
csqegsaaa ay aa atiea aaa: tl 
Citat weaarg a vara ATS WAT | 
aedieg wy: aa (aeatea TATRA Ui 
ARIS! TRHEAVSTTAATHATATAT | 
ATIC RU Be AMT FT ATTA URlt 
Sloka 2.—The configurations termed @® (chakra - 
discus), %g& (Dhanus-bow), s#2% ( Sringataka-triangle), 
ave (Danda-staff), gt (Pura-town,) sta (Prasa-dart) and 
ag (Vajra thunder-bolt), bring famine and drought to 
‘mankind and promote war among kings. | 


Adh. XX. SI. 3-6] fesitsvara: 205 
en pn sn ntact seneetatmnatnienentnlithteN EAS 


AWM WG SET: 1 
Facraite; @ deart vsaea & neg ar | 
QT A RES TUNIS AYAATA s Ui 
aia aia tsar geater Rane Rareana | 
AAA AAA JI TaARITIT Harz UI 
Sloka 8.—In any part of the sky where a cluster of 
planets is seen at Sunset, there will be another king in 
the country corresponding to that quarter, and there will 
be great trouble from foreign foes. 
UWMII FAL AAT IMA TAT Sq? | 
aaa: weATeAgE Paretwny ell 
Sloka 4.—When planets come together in any as- 
terism, people belonging to that particular asterism (vide 
Adhyaya XIV, supra) will be killed. But they will prove 
auspicious to the same people if they shed bright rays 
and do not occult each other. 
Bul A qaraaicarary | 
aa aa fast Anita Savarese ies | 
STSCANAASTITA TETTATA: Il 
WMA: TAM: APTASOU : Taraoraar: | 
gtatqawaaa: agi Rarragrat eq: ti 
WATTTATA ATM EAMAT AT ASA | 
“ ba Sen! “~ e 
PIAATUAMIMET SAT AKST U4 
Sloka 5.—I1 shall now describe the characteristics 
and effects of the six planetary combinations, viz., @aa 
Samvarta-concourse, aay —Samagama — gathering, 
wate Sammoha-tarnishing, @att Samaja—meeting, 
aferqra Sannipata-encounter, and ata Kosa-fellowship. 


GHA Aart? As Ticaaalsaar TH | 
ara ay waRahergga: @ aA: gt 


206 qeediatara = [Adh. XX. Sl. 7-8. 


qe: Veranda Wet ae asat aararsa: | 
TANATTHAKA ATATSSATT BA? lit 

Sa: wee: we area ale a afiararea: | 
atpaara: Ravn Ayers way vat: lel 


Slokas 6-8.—When four or five planets, marching or 
stationary, congregate in a single asterism, the Yoga is 
termed @a@@ or concourse. If they be also combined 
with Rahu or a comet, it is icalled ate or tarnishing. 
When a stationary planet associates with another 
stationary planet, or one on march with another of the 
same type, the conjunction is named @arst or meeting. 
When some other planet joins the party made up of 
Jupiter and Saturn, there is st or fellowship. If two 
planets, one rising heliacally in the east and the other in 
the south (a little behind), it is called affrara or an en- 
counter. Any conjunction of planets other than the 
above five is called @arta or gathering, in which the 
effect will always be auspicious, if the planets be large, 
resplendent, and natural in appearance. 


aut @ aaaaigaraiy | 


TesUATa AIA BATTS | 
araeala ast waaay i 
DWATTSAAT FaaR see: TAIT j 

a fe wala araacat gfharwaragr ad 
ue sfea: saisqraqe: sreat velfeat aie a | 
usaraagraagears & atrarared: 1 
ae dito @ Get qreat Ge awa wet qa | 
WU TATR: FT qaranreq: ayixe: i 
aa aSTAAT: TA AT TE WAT: | 


qed aad: Rifeugga: @ asaite: u 


XX. 9. XXII. 1. | qe eaisvara: 207 


aut ¢ dataaaareal qeileatal Wag TATA | 
AMTAT FAA Ager Aewaig: BE alegia Ni 
Sloka 9.—The effects of the two Yogas aaa and 
aarata are indifferent, ¢. ¢., neither good, nor bad, aate 
and «tat are dangerous to people. In @ara Yoga, the year 
will be very beneficial, while in affqra there will certainly 
be the raging of hostilities. 
AAT A BAT: | 
qaadaway Weal Beutel was: ta: t 
SiMtalalneg: ARTA: TAWA: 
aimed AglaTmearagraaa | 
aura aanraalgarara | 
WMAVAAMTAAL: Aled Als wart Bee a 
GAP aAAasT swoqy qTWaqrarey u 
aa aaa faze: auraatearary | 
ghieartinavswaeagiegy a Tar: Ha: | 
sawaieat Har aaateat angie: u 
Maus WUTaleat awsat =a a Tavs | 
OVA WaicaTTIearat @ AWTS 0 
gafaaiauaat asaieat a aqeaaratan: | 
waasAe HFaineaat a ast J 
Nea TAS BY AMATIaAg at | 
Fears definraita Sie TATSAAYAT | 
Thus ends the 20th Adhyaya on’ the Planetary Triangle.” 


TASINY IRI Pregnancy of clouds. 
TA ATT MOT: MIZHISA AAAI | 
FMA TWieTs qzeHIS: TART NLU 
Sloka 1.—As food is the elixir of life to living beings, 


and as that food is dependent on the monsoon, it should 
be investigated carefully. 


208 qeediterara = [Adh. XXI. S1.i2-5 


amamtia gatas frag ae eeaq | 
HIT Te TTHTITTTSTTT STATA UN 


Sloka 2.—Having read the characteristics enunciated 
by ancient sages such as Garga, Parasara, Kasyapa and 
Vajra, in their works, I am now giving the properties of 
the rainy season. 


eafteaRahad aaa a aie aa | 
TA Fara ait a vata feae*geiey Uti 


Sloka 3.—The prediction of an astrologer who day 
and night attentively watches the symptoms of the 
pregnancy of clouds will come true like that of a sage 
when he determines the fall of rain. 


fe qa: qwarassrasaraista afeiecaa | 
qeqizeqy aie Harel Hor wate nvil 


Sloka 4.—Which science is snperior to this astro- 
logical science which determines the exact time of rain, 
since by knowing this science alone, one gets the power 
of visualising the past, present and the future even in 
this Kali age which destroys all good things ? 


Ruscha Sian TErandiea waeaa: eT | 
aa dead agat aalatat wad aes ii 


Sloka 5.—Some sages declare that the days of 
pregnancy begin after the full-moon of Kartika month; 
but that opinion is not shared by the majority. Here 
I shall give the opinion of Garga and others. 

amt @ fagea: | 

Berrahes ete frac | 

Trani aate ara ceTaTa ETT It 


Adh. XXI. Sl. 6-8] yareeitsvara: 209 


aera gavatsqery | 
al At agTTa sant Set Say MGI 
Sloka 6.—The symptoms of pregnancy are to be 
detected when the Moon transits Purvashadha commenc- 
ing from the first day of Margasira. 
AAD Wa: | 
BBlEl Aldara Garersswagiersa | 
famrax @ want aatat warn az tl 
HIG SIT 
faaral ariaidea sfacteaa aa | 
Vargas By wat a~er wad tl 


TATATITT WAAL AAA WITT | 
qaaaa faqa aaa Waar lho 


Sloka 7—The foetus formed during the Moon’s 
stay in a particular asterism will be born 195 (Solar) 
days hence, the Moon standing again in the same 
asterism according to the laws of her revolution. 

aul a agraaigaraiy t 

qrar@arara: sangre lassar: | 


eR fC CAM 


aig: WE AAT HATS: aq aaa ll 
Rargaar: Hit TF Fou TATAT TWAT | 
AMIATUAMT A ALAM AA Acvarary lleil 


Sloka 8.—The foetuses formed in the bright half 
of the month will come out in the dark half and vice 
versa, those furmed in the day time will come out at 
night and vice versa and those which are formed at 
dawn in the evening and vzee versa. 

aut a Wa: | 

fear waa at wat wit @ gfe vee) 

PSI aya: FA gy = sehen 

#. a. 27 


210 geeai@arara, «= [Adh, XXI. SI. 9-12. 


tharaadkea: arararat saie | 
 wararet ayaa: qlaret srdfa u 
qaararagaya: vararat Taaie | 
afrarat agya: Tiaecat sada u 
qald a: ayga: vargral sada | 
aaa Vay aa a TNR Tq 
fears ¢ agra: a fae sqaa | iss 
ATAU Tal WeTHS WTA | 
Trea sanqag faeasaca aq et 
(an \S ~ 
ATMA WE AAT HST TaAaratiea | 
aI SUIAT eagaeszasHy | oll 
HLTATHARA WTITAAd Atacsan: | 
A ~ ~ 
TAT HNGA RAN 4 asaTHaAsH lle eh 
AN ~ ¢ 
ATAAIAA A: HsqIaA aieet war: | 
Tartare: Haagssawed (2 
Slokas 9-12.—The foetuses formed in the begin- 
ning of Margasirsha and Pushya are of little consequence. 
Those formed in the dark half of Pushya may come 
out in the bright half of Sravana. Similarly, those that 
are formed in the bright half of Magha will see the 
light of the day in the dark fortnight of Sravana. The 
former part of Bhadrapada may be fixed upon as the 
time of birth corresponding to the dark half of Magha. 
Those that are formed in the first half of Phalguna may 
be said to come out in the latter half of Bhadrapada. 
But those in the dark tortnight of Phalguna will be born 
in the bright half of Aswayuja. The clouds that are 
formed in the first half of Chaitra will yield water in 
the latter half of Aswayuja ; | and those that are formed 


in the latter half of Chaitra will rain in the first half 
of Kartika. 


Adh, XXI. Sl. 13-18. ] Garaatseara: 211 


AY ST TW: 
MAT MAT aeeQaAVeyT Heya F | 
aanaga sigeMea g siasy ul 
VBSIAN HO} y Rega Bary | 
usagia Araaia era we fag u ga 
QUMWNCAT Bay | 
waa: GMAT MIAAea aia: 
arate feat Aaa wals araty 1230 
Sloka 18,—The clouds formed in the east will give 
water in the west and vice versa. Thesame rule holds 
good in the case of the other pairs of directions, In like 


manner, the winds too are reverse at the two periods. 
AA FT TUNA | 


ay ata wad wets wee Wags aaraa g Sas 

Yea evi Ha ge aaa wis usa aa at: sata 
sligaqeatyaaaaaat aed aera | 
ferafaaaguahaschad angarat izel 
Wyeast TaaHeleasTay | 
BrareaaHa Malegeecaaay Nei 
ATAUIAAMATATEM AAR WAT ASAT | 
VaaaRAT Besar WaT 1k 
Fagen: setoram: vsaqar get ferent: | 
TAT AVITALTSU ATAGTT TT 12911 
Tao geaM: ase dist g Pa: | 
RAaMAaa WATE TATA ell 


Slokas 14-18—-The good symptoms at the time of 
the conception of clouds are the following: a delightful 


Q12 quedfgarara [Adh. XXI, Sl. 19-22 


and cool breeze from the north, north-east, or east; 
a clear sky; the Sun and the Moon surrounded by 
a glossy, bright and thick halo; the sky covered with 
large, bulky, smooth, needle-like or razor-like, red clouds 
or having the colour of the crows-eggs or a peacock’s neck 
when the Moon and the stars shine brightly ; a good 
twilight—morning or evening—accompanied bya rain. 
bow, good rumbling of thuuder, lightning anda mock 
Sun; groups of birds and animals crying pleasantly in 
the north, north-east or east; the planets being large 
beaming brightly moving to the north (of the asterisms) 
and unhurt; trees with their sprouts unimpaired, and 
men and quadrupeds happy; these symptoms nourish 
all the embryos. There are however some special rules 
tending to the growth of the embryos and arising from 
the particular nature of the season which I am now 
propounding. 

am aqua: | wa migeng arnfay agg wag a gt 
qo | ata mg aa ay at ty saaiea | ag araTau- 
weakeqaalt: nuiatqaderanaretta | warata aa Se 
quegaarasramt qilegrat sate: | carerar ait arzw 
araa yer u 


GY GAIA Aesaresatsegan: Aaa: | 
mead wags ala qastafeeratas 1128 
MT WAST AIAMKSTTA TATA | 
HAP AWA FT AAT FAT {Roll 
HAAS SAAT? Teatswmargan: avai: | 
ghanaranen Byweal tay zat 182 
qqaqqagbawiaa wal: Yar aaa: | 
qaaaaeehaquiaes Rata tara Wal! 


Adh, XXI. SI. 23-24] veféetsvara: 213 


Slokas 19-22.—The happy tokens in the months of 
Margasirsha and Pushya are ared glow of the horizon 
at dawn and evening, clouds with halos, not too severe 
cold in Margasirsha and not too thick frost in Pushya ; 
in Magha, a strong wind, the Sun and the Moon dim 
by mist, severe cold, and the Sunrising or setting with 
clouds; in the month of Phalguna, a rough and violent 
gale, glossy floating banks of clouds, an incomplete halo 
round the Sun or the Moon and the Sun russet or red ; 
in the month of Chaitra, the foetuses forming among 
wind, clouds, rain and halos are of good augury ; and 
in the month of Vaisakha, such as are attended with 
clouds, wind and rain, lightning and thunder, are 
favourable. 

aU A BRAT: | 

etaawt a areymeATS NTT sey | 

are ara adtira strat aitarixere tt 

WY WA aes Tearars Ft 

Git arara & eer are waaqis FAA ti 

AEFI Fat arar: wezataor: | 

wiaay aunt Saoregst aaq 

agia weal arar: gt: waist svaiaron: 1 

Serra ari Sarit enss ane wef u 

am @ aaragikarara | 

went qarearenestataaqarpates | 

aitaatmameoqaaqeaana g aaa 0 

Bria gece: Raa soot far Matera | 

Wearys Hevarat qevaiewaqqarasa!: tt 

THAT THT ATA SASATSTAALATT | 
THMAMBT TAY FA WYTTHE UR 
daigaracteonitanta aqareat Tsar: | 


aaa ea TUREaaeM FATES Ul 


214 geeatearaa [Adh. XXI. Sl. 25-26, 


Slokas 23-24.—Clouds that resemble pearls, silver, 
Kamala flower, lily or collyrium in colour and which are 
in the shape of aquatic animals will contain abundant 
water in their embryo. Those clouds which have been 
scorched by the burning rays of the Sun and fanned by 
a gentle breeze will at the time of delivery pour torrents 
of water as if they were angry. 

aur a agiaararany | 

TYTAIFS AST ASAAtaMleqars Yat Tat: | 

Rearataagerhaeiiga Rasirenst it 

yang gigar Mergaraca: | 

Maas BI Al Waly az Far it 

fearqateoaqieacaay sg ITAA 

RATT WAV AT: WHA Teese TAT AT H 


TATA oRACHATTMTITA see: | 
RICE MEIC CACLE NUP RACE mI ED] 
BaUeaerHaUT TY Te Teal: | 
TAMA AAaMAeM TAS NVI 
Slokas 25-26—The following are the indications for 
the miscarrying of the foetus: Fall of meteors, lightning, 
dust-storm, false fire in the quarters, earth-quake, appear- 
ance of forms of citiesin the sky, Thamasa Keelakas, 
Ketu, planetary warfare, portentous thunder, unnatural 
phenomena in rain, such as blood, a cross line of clouds at 
Sunset or Sunrise (vide Adhyaya XLVII-19:infra), 
rainbow and eclipse of the Sun or the Moon. By these 
and similar portents of three kinds, viz, celestial, 
atmospheric and terrestrial, an embryo gets destroyed. 
wat as aT: | 
agaay aarad atari | 
sepiaaasera aTaeEts 


Adh. XXI. Sl. 27-29] qeftreitseara: 215 


qitagr: Medal aaa aay a | 

waa ve feat creat a 

Mada TASS aUTAT aI | 

WEZTE seg garg Tay farafsae wv 

qa a GUA | ast REMNATaAaaesAaiarnanaeTtd- 
amntinedikaanaeqaangaa Tatar I 


seaMaTa: aATT SINT | 
nalnt Radiata Ara aaa NV! 
Sloka 27.—Signs, precisely the reverse/of those, both 
general and special, for any particular season, by which 


the growth of an embrayo is assured, produce the con- 
trary results. 


ALIISAATISTT ALATA | 
ATTY Isl WA TAIT AAA NR 
Sloka 28-—A foetus that develops when the Moon 
stands in any of the five asterisms, viz., Purvabhadra, 


Uttarabhadra, Purvashadha, Uttarashadha and Rohini in 
any season will yield plenty of rain. 
TAATUBURANAATATT: YAY TAY | 
GS agg aay srcactidediaaa: Nt 
Sloka 29.—An embryo that is formed in Satabhi- 
shak, Aslesha, Ardra, Swati or Magha proves fertile and 
develops (or rains) for many days; while, being stricken 
with three-fold portents (referred to above), it is destroyed. 
fiaugrasanaaria aqaasalaat Weatgna- 
Ret aeaad Bla via Rarvaitza ae | 
farargiestareatiaaa masnraq 
aT a Ta: | ae aS iy afreareoy | 
WUAsieIAT VT ay BATETAA I 


216 geeaivarara [Adh, XXI. SI. 30-32. 


aaagre Gawy wrzET IAA 

@ Tat: aeag arta anata | SEIT ti 
Sepaltaead ay sqar acalyigas | 
a wat: awe aha araag a aia ui 


aaraesast 92 Hea altar t 
Malar RaaraTHATAT Gary: [Roll 
Sloka 30.—Foetuses coming into being when the 
Moon is in conjunction with any of the aforesaid asterisms 
during the month of Margasirsha, Pushya, Magha, Phal- 
guna, Chaitra and Vaisakha will yield rain after 195 
days for 8, 6, 16, 24, 20 and 3 days respectively. 
RAIA WT 
AT HSUTaVaeg Tisast @ Heqa | 
Suara g aaaegihagaa 
wet leisy ZU aeqeatg a aia 
~ ba ba’ ° Ly 
Gaia: WANT AA SaHe esa | 
Con VAN ~ c 
SCRE CC RUCUCT IC MIES| 


Sloka 81.—If an cmbryo be accompanied by the 
five phenomena, v2z., wind, water, lightning, thunder and 
cloud, it will pour rain over an area of 100 Yojanas and 
for every phenomenon less, over half the extent of the 
previous one; but if it has only che phenomenon, over 
‘five Yojanas around. 


ain: Wwatalaa wa Aeseala waaay | 
qg faar wae: wit gee Tay 11221 


Sloka 82.—-The*quantity of rainfall will at the season 
amount to a Drona if the embryo has the five concomi- 
tants; three Adhakas are the result of wind; six, of 
ightning ; nine, of clouds and twelve, of thunder. 


Adh--XXI. Sl. 33-34] veféeitseura: 217 


A Drona = 200 Palas. An Adhaka = }th of a Drona or 11 
oz. Avoir. According to Parasara, an Adhaka is the capacity of a 
vessel with a circular mouth 20 inches in diameter and whose 
depth is eight inches. 
FVUTSHAMAGITTTGTA TUAT WE- 
wesiaga ginact fearerarota: | 
Way: Tate Ataear Meaegionieeartory vn 
aa featqene frapsiqeiizas | 
ang aia arg Raaseaing | 
AAT AAT sere | 
SMUAMs HeesaraHeareguanivran: | 
qarncesaaenay yams qeay un git 
—Adh. XXITI-2, snfra. 
aul da Fait: | 
aa 9 aes faeureafta g greqaeq 0 
Wass AUB Titay wistsyz ti 
fafraqaaira zit asia ataa: 0 


HUICATH WHIATATT TAT: | 
Tata wat at Quagahya ylateat: lz 


Sloka 33,—If the asterism at which an embryo is 
formed be afflicted by a malefic planet, it will pour down 
showers of hail stones, thunderbolt and fish. If at that 
time, the Moon or the Sun be posited in this star and be 
conjoined with or aspected by a benefic, there will be 
copious rain. 


TaaATIshagyiarara Afafragar | 
inet Iseahys go aye sat vals NV 


Sloka 34.—Too much rain without apparent cause 
at the time of the formation of foetuses tends to their 
destruction. Ifthe quantity of rainfall exceed }th of a 
Drona, there will be its miscarriage. 

u. 8. 28 


248 quedi@ararg (Adh. XXI. Sl. 35-37. 
migad vised Pitfragar altgie: | 


Feiaeat BICOL Tat | 

Wat ANNAN TAA aoewAEH a1 

Taare demaraaey geass aaa aed u ef 
WAS Ger aay MarTTaeAaNs a ges | 
MMAMAAAy BHT eATAEA NAM 


Sloka 35.—If a full-grown embryo does not yield 
rain at the proper season owing to planetary and other 
evil influences, it will ‘rain with hail-stones at the same 
period as it formed at the beginning. 


Bisa sla aq waters Ga: Tara: | 
HOG Asad wiseagrala 134i 


Sloka 86.—Just as the milk of a milch cow grows 
hard if retained too long, so does the water kept back be- 
yond its time, 


qTaasslaAiasMeaa a? 
a wala Aas: TaeIUFyIa: | 
Raat az da wansshayh 
TATAAAAAT BBUF BUA Rll 


Sloka 37,—An embryo which has got the five con- 
comitant signs, v7z., wind, rain, lightning, thunder and 
clouds, since it is composed of these, yields plenty of rain- 
“One which at the time of formation loses too much water 
Produces at the period of delivery, a drizzle. 


eames sloka i is from aaraatear. 


"Thus ends. the 21st Adhyaya on the “Pregnancy of Clouds.” 


ER 


Adh. XXII. S). 1-2.) saafétaitsvare: 219 


TAATTSATA? (VV Pregnancy of the Air. 


sqaftaserargimeanty aaa faa: | 
AEYAITA: TEM RarqaqrentarTaey UI 


Sloka 1.—The first four days commencing from the 
8th day of the bright half of Jyeshta are sustained by the 
winds ; and they will prove favourable if they be attended 
with soft and gentle breeze, and if the sky be covered 
with glossy clouds. 


ATT MANY I AIASA WATHarar: | 
Manga Tar yA qT TA ui 


Sloka—2. If there be rain in the four asterisms 
beginning with Swati in the same month and fortnight, 
the four months commencing with Sravana will be in 
order the retainers of rain. That is, there will be no rain 
in the several months if there be rain in the corresponding 
asterism. 

AUT A BBAT: | 

sagea Qesresat g aay wsaa 1 

SANT ACs Tiel BRataeaitar: u 

Termafaysafieeahraares: | 

faepisgiinqursa afatzarad a 

Uso: YA AAl AYA: Alea: War: | 

MAGAaae: Hs Wa TAGE: ti 

AA: TALAUTAMAAGA: Wane: | 

qheqat: Baran: |: dear: Rragerst: 

erat g Mra Cengesyegriayaa | 

wizay agiv: ameay Saga Sar 

Reet g SMS ae ge ge ea a) 

gag afy at gidear atitereaony y 


220 qneeftarara [Adh. XXII. SL..3-8 


at aT: BBs Baraat aearea a rar | 
ARCATA -BleraeayT TB Ui 
Sloka 8—lIf those four days of retention (arga- 
Dharana) be of the same type, the result will be auspicious, 
If, unlike, they prove disastrous and are said to engender 
danger from thieves. The following is the authority of 
sage Vasishta. 
agen ayia: aataacareal: | 
KASH A ALT: BRAT UN 
aat ¢ Aaa: Ag: gaan agdwar: | 
aat adaenrat af santa Wl 
argent: aay zat ata aie | 
Gant gat ara: Bist TtaTeTzy 1911 
was NiaM: fara areaeagheat: | 
gaat Aaa ataadtansat i911 
aa: Rava: azarae sahyorafateat: | 
qa Aenea ge: aAaanArsay lic 
Slokas 4-8.—The days of retention of the foetus 
will be favourable if they be accompanied by lightning, 
water-drops, dust-storm, and the Sun and the Moon 
screened by the clouds. If there should be beautiful 
flashes of lightning emanating from (moving towards ?) 
the auspicious quarters, an intelligent astronomer should 
predict the thriving of all crops. If on the same day 
there be rain with dust or if children engage them- 
selves in happy sports, the cries of birds be pleasant and 
their sport be in dust, water or the like, if the Sun and 


the Moon, be encircled by halos which are glossy and 
not broken, then, there will be rain tending to the growth 


Adh. XXIII. Sl. 1-3] wafaeitsenra: 921 


of allcrops. If the clouds be glossy, collected together 
and moving in a clockwise manner, there will be a 
heavy rain favouring the growth of all crops. 

Thus ends the 22nd Adhyaya on “ Pregnancy of the Air”. 


TTGNTEITA? U2 The Quantity of Rainfall. 


8 ¢ a 
sapal audtarat yarpeneaeaae | 
THAT I AST TAIT BETAS: I 
Sloka 1.—If there should be rain in the asterisms 
commencing with Purvashadha after the full Moon in 
the month of Jyeshta, the astronomer should judge the 
quantity and the good or bad effects of the rain. 


aur |] Ti: | 

S48 qealameg aria warez: | 

ang gitar fiacqaeaae ti 
CMAMS HSHAMAHATTTANT ArT | 
qaaaasanad fates War uz 


Sloka 2.—The quantity of rainfall should be deter- 
mined through a gauge whose diameter is one cubit, and 
when it contains 50 palas, it will be equal to one Adhaka. 


aul 4 Aaraagarary | 
sigey Gladtaatayyrat wea ze | 
AMCITAASATA ANTTBAT CAAT Ul ATHA | 
ya altat gat sia at faecacaonag | 
ava Fa area itary ariters waAT UM 


Sloka 3,—The quantity of rain should be gauged 
on the day of the asterism during which there is rain 


222 qeeaigarara fAdh. XXIII. S). 4-5- 


for the first time through the (amount of) rain by which 
the earth is cleared of dust or the drops of water on the 
tips of blades of grass. 


Sfraataes caaiaqaVEs areas | 
WHAAGMATTAAITSITATA IW Vl 


Sloka 4.—Some sages such as Kasypa opine that 
if there be rain in a certain area at the beginning, there 
will be good rain there throughout the season; while 
others such as Devala maintain that if there be rain over 
an areaof ten Yojanas, there will be plenty of rain 
during the whole season. But, according to Garga, 
Vasishta and Parasara, good rain during the season 
should be predicted if there be rainfall over an area of 
not less than twelve Y ojanas. 

TW @ BAA: | 

sas qa Bae TT are esa | 

aves antara araat ag ata a 

aqat a 2azs: } 

TSI YB FS TWAAAAAgsyA | 

qUSS Gaara aaa ag asia 

aa GTi: | 

MUTT TW aA aAKas | 

TZe aaa at atiars PATA zia. 

HY a weafas yausts TWA ora: | 
qe aAMISy TS aay AST CTT? UI 

Sloka 5.—In whichever stars there was rain at the 
beginning, there will generally be rain once again in 
the same stars. If there was no rain atall in any one 


of the asterisms beginning with Purvashadha at the time 
of delivery, then there will be no rain in the season. 


Adh. XXIII. SI?6-10] wati@evisvare: 223 


rencaareareaiioraiagrg T Tea ZT | 
qaenexaty aca Sra TT UG 
ray AT GVATATTI SY ZT Taw | 

qeurat yaaa: garal faazio: hi 
UegweMTa aa q feafa: aaa ea sataRt | 
AAA TETMTIT Gaplat lich 

qagata ge @ Baal awa <a Bl a | 


VESTA Bla Fiore Freaaeag Ah 

Slokas 6-9.—If there should be rain in any one of 
the asterisms, viz, Hasta, Purvashadha, Mrigasira, 
Chittra, Revati and Dhanishta, the quantity of rainfall 
in the season will be 16 Dronas; in Satabhishak, Jyeshta 
and Swati, it will be 4 Dronas; in Krittika, 10 Dronas > 
in Sravana, Magha, Anuradha, Bharani and Moola, 
14 Dronas; in Purvaphalguni, 25 Dronas; in Punar- 
vasu, 20 Dronas; in Visakha and Uttarashadha, 20 
Dronas; in Aslesha, 13 Dronas. In Uttarabhadra, 
Uttaraphalguni and Rohini, itis 25 Dronas. In Purva- 
bhadra and Pushya, it is 15 Dronas; in Aswitii, 12 
Dronas; in Ardra,it is 13 Dronas. These quantities 
will hold good, provided the asterisms are not hurt in 
any way. 

aul a qaraagigaraig 

aa gut Haalaieraretgharawaasaare: | 

falivaaa rar: agagar: remediate Ut 

ASW UUSATA ASTAZS: ge | 


favafalaeg afgaranrfrrangg ASHI: U-gler, 
tigaagihes 4 Riaaratraganed 4 
gad 3 7. fra a ata: gaaes Grew fed at 


224 quedigarara, [AdH® XXIV. SI. 1-3, 


Sloka 10.—If an asterism be afflicted by the Sun, 
Saturn or Ketu, or hurt by Mars, or by the three-fold 
portent, there will be no prosperity to mankind, nor 
will there be any rain» But if the asterism be unhurt 
and conjoined with benefics, beneficial results will accrue. 

am Swi: | 

qaaiaed areg aay ararariaa | 

senafeataaalte auger Sgait aru 

ageaga freuntgadta ga az | 


Thus ends the 23rd Adhyaya on “ The Quantity of Rainfall ”. 


Wiutatareara: Vil The Moon's Conjunction 
with Rohini 


HAR YS AUNATTATISFTMAWAGHIGS | 
qghanavegalaniaagaaaga ett 
aireareatina qatar aang | 
TATACHATAT AT ATA TT: 12 
MAIMED AMAT AMWAETATAATIAl | 
AAIAIANE WAM TTA THT 131 
Slokas 1-3.—I shall now try to expound briefly 
the good and bad effects arising from the Moon’s con- 
junction with Rohini, having duly taken cognisance of 
them as explained by Garga, Parasara, Kasyapa and 
Maya to their hosts of pupils and as instructed by 
Brihaspati to Narada in the park on the summit of the 
Meru, which resounds with the humming of the bees 
clinging’ to the flowers of the trees in the caves of 
the golden rocks, which rings with the twitterings of 


Adh, XXIV. Sl. 4-5] sqffeitseara: 225 


numerous birds and which has the melodious strains of 
music of celestial damsels. 


Rohin i Yoga is the period of a day when the Moon passes 
through the star Rohini in the dark half of the lunar month of 
Ashadha. 


In this connection, Mr. Chidambara Iyer, very aptly remarks: 

‘‘These prefatory remarks clearly shew that what follow are 
important scientific truths in the eyes of Hindu astronomers: that the 
weather indications of one single day in a year should form the subject 
of so much calculation with the Hindus in determining the future 
agricultural prospect of the land while to the inexperienced eye of a 
western man of science, the day appears as indifferent or otherwise as any 
other day of the year argues that modern science is still far behind in her 
investigations of the laws of nature.’’ 


MATANENAATA ATH TACT | 
TMeAAS AHasyr at Wearregerelyeraa vit 
VT AAT TI Tea: a Aeqaia: Kl AAR | 
TATA AMSAT GS Prey Wl 
Slokas 4-5.—An astronomer should carefully observe 
the Moon’s conjunction with Rohini in the dark half 
of Ashadha and then predict its good or bad effects to 
mankind according to the tenets of the Sastras. How 
a future conjunction of the Moon with the asterism 
should be foretold has been explained by me in my work 
Panchasiddhantika under the head of ‘ Conjunction 
with Fixed Stars”. The effects, however, must be 
declared as deduced from the Moon’s size, brightness, 
colour, direction and from portents at the time and 
the winds. 
Al A GATASN-aABAA | 
Set aiaiaade Heat arieaaswaz a | 
AAT FT AKA: TAAAATAT: tt 
q. a. 29 


226 gediararg [Adh. XXIV. Sl. 6-8. 


The reference to waiuatitaat here clearly shows that the 
author had already completed that work. 


GUEAIAG Feast a Vs sqRtIaas Faraaca: | 
TY TATAMN AANA TIGA Stas THAT MU 
ATAMAMA MATS TSIASViea? FWA | 
ABTYS? FANVFT FIT AesmMaaTsa: (91 


Slokas 6-7.—A Brahmin, going to a place north or 
east from the town, staying there three nights fasting 
and worshipping the sacred fire, should drawa diagram 
of the planets and the asterisms occupicd by them and 
worship them with oblations coupled with incense and 
flowers. He must occupy the bare ground strewn with 
the Darbha grass, decked atthe four corners with water-. 
pots containing gems, water and herbs, covered above 
with the sprouts of trees and not blackened at the bottom 
and kept clean and anointed. 

qat @ Wit: 

ANUS ATAHED HW ATA BTA: | 

fafat seas Sar Faaraaas(y ar i 

wat Pager zag: Harita PaARZa: | 

fAAAHAB Vl@ WHI TATA: 1 

VUMGAMTAZEA AAA: | 

aaseea: Wt area feat aqsaa war 

CATT Baal itaareyIsAIT ti 


MS VAN qeaada aia aan rare Hew | 
TEI AMRTHAAS Al ABTA VCH 


Sloka 8.—He should then sanctify all sorts of seeds 
with the hymns of Mahavrata and immerse them in the 
water containing gold and sacred grass in the pot. Then 


Adh, XXIV. SI]. 9-10.] wafasitssara: 227 
he should make a Homa with hymns addressed to the 
Marut, Varuna and the Moon. 


Beat wana csaevenaat fraettesat 4 | 
Mat HI sql aA Wea Aaay Baws Sil 

Sloka 9.—He should prepare a very fine flag of 
black colour, four cubits in length, and hoist it ona staff 
of 12 cubits. After acquainting himself with the 
different directions, he should ascertain through the 
movement of the streamer the direction of the wind at 
the Moon’s conjunction with the asterism. 

TU ST FUT | ATeMAl qa: TTA: | 

UAVS Ba ares qeareUareaarETT 

aa eearaqaraas WaiagiFasrargqaMaA | aTat- 

UEAUIBC TI SAUTIAAAaTAAN | 

aTeA ea eaalsy Aearay Arex tt 
AATZATAN WETAHA Taira aaracas | 
UUs WSSHAT! ALT WMT MAB Tay a ay! | 

Sloka 10.—For purposes of determining the times 
of rainfall, the watches (3 hour-periods) should be taken 
as corresponding to as many fortnights and the sub. 
divisions of a watch, to the days. If the wind blows 
round from east to south and soon (2, ¢.in the water 
order), it indicates prosperity to the world. When two 
contrary winds are blowing, that which shows firmness 
is more powerful, and it is from this wind alone predic- 
tion should be made. 

aat @ Wi: 

aaa ays wat aw Tae | 

GUNA BGT | DeIsas Tag 4 


qa daaizaae qat arat q elit | 


228 weeaigararga [Adh. XXIV. Sl. 11-12 


srgeq ait ait qi gt g aaa 

ay Ga safamea art aeahaa aa: | 

wea ata Ggrgdeat arar g awa u 

aIgqaisaga Ga araraar g AeaAT | 

wamfe fesar aula atTz: ti 

It will thus be seen that the day alone, and not the night, 
should ba divided into four equal parts to represent the four 
months of the rainy season and the obServation should also be 
made during the day. 

ay @ RMATA: 

fare alfa gig: Ga WawAas ar | 

alega az agli farm: Taga 

aaa fzaa agate ata qe: | 

alae aang 4 ast azaigharsag |l 

aad ared ait ay arg: sfaarafa | 

aa a away agqeaa noalfedta nu 
wd aiiisgieatia Gia aedig aaa gana Hew | 
Yat g aisaiseRaacaet Ng ages area: eeu 

Sloka 11.—During the Moon’s conjunction with 
Rohini, note which of the seeds placed in the water- 
vessel have sprouted and even of them, which particular 
part; only those grains and none else will flourish 
during the year, soalso only that proportion of them 
will thrive. 


arareanata Rat fas Faqatedsass | 

TAI Piaia vieaina wraeaaenis aseqa: 12 
Sloka 12.—It is a good augury, if, during the 

Moon’s conjunction with Rohini, the quarters resound 


with the pleasant cries of birds that do not fly towards 
the Sun, as wellas of animals, the sky is clear and the 


Adh. XXIV. S]. 13-16.) agraaiiseara: 229 


breeze not vitiated. I shall now treat of the effects of 
the clouds and the wind. 


aa Aaa: 

Git CYTAl Bal BITAea: FATT: | 

sain: Agaar: Wiqaraw ga uw 
Braatiaaa: faa: Hae Hraeaysntaaaias | 
AMANSTIBAATIa: WHRaaeSzaaga fate: 12 
Ra aeMMITAgIATEM RTT AT ANH: I 
oiratra Raghfaangeagg egal: NQvII 


Slokas 15-14—The sky in some quarters is covered 
with large and black and white clouds, in others with 
white ones and in some others with dark ones as with 
huge serpents whose bellies and backs alone are visible 
in their coils and to whose moving tongues correspond 
the flashes of lightning in the clouds. It anpears as 
though it were bedecked with clouds some of wuaich are 
as white as the interior of lotus-blossoms, whose fringeS 
are tinged by the rays of the rising Sun, which are dark 
like bees, yellow like saffron, red like the Kimsuka 
flower, and white and which consequently have a large 
variety of colours. 


atraamegrt a aedaeaqraia aa | 
feraleraaiguigd aatya qrawiaaracg lel 
Sloka 15.—Or, the sky which is studded with dark 
clouds and chequered with moving streaks of lightning 


and the rain-bow, looks verily like a forest on fire, which 
is teeming with herds of tigers and bisons. 


AINAAVSAVAMATTIMAISTT: AAs TWAT | 
ECO Ch CIC Ee CMa 


230 geedigararg [Adh. XXIV. SI. 17-20. 


Sloka 146—Or, the sky is blocked by clouds that 
simulate the mass of rocks onthe collyrium mountain 
or by those that set at naught the lustre of snow, pearls, 
conch-shells and the ravs of the Moon. 


UEGARUTSHATA: HACINAAAS EATS: | 
\ \ bs ad Ce 
ARAMA SAT AMASsAoTs Wega: It 
Sloka 17,—Or, it is covered with elephants in the 
form of clouds, which are as'dark as Tamala and the bees, 
which have lightning corresponding to the golden 
trappings, cranes to the tusks in front, pouring rain to 


ichor, moving tops to the trunks, and the multi-coloured 
rainbows to the beautiful banners held aloft. 


Vegi AANA HaaaTsecawamaeat Tarary | 
eal Vara Bed SCAACTAT ART AT 2c 
Sloka 18.—Or, there are in the sky turned crimson 
by twilight, clusters of clouds, which, bearing the dark hue 
of lilies, rob, as it were, Lord Krishna, clad in his yellow 
silken garment, of his beauty. 
PCRIGE MCC RCEBIPMCIEIE AAMRIEAAL | 
ania taeatataa: alsa afearagea: at | 
Sloka 19.—If the clouds have their loud and distinct 
peal of thunder followed by the cries of peacocks, Chataka 
birds and frogs'and hang at the horizon having spread 


throughout the firmament, then they will pour down 
torrents of rain on the earth. 


MAASAI SIM SS IHISS ACATTta: | 


aie Fraga aad ate gieaTA aT WATTS Yi llRoll 
Sloka 20.—If the sky should be covered for three, 
two or one day at a stretch with banks of clouds of the 


Adh, XXIV. S121] wal attseara: 231 


above description, there would be plenty of food, the 
people would be happy and contented or, there would 
be abundant water in the land, respectively. 

AM A Wat: tt 

SaaS AAA VNAAAT: | 

PRRAAAUASAMAAATAT: MN 

AVA Fearals TaaHealaar: | 

Tal Tal: TaAVea fatkeaaagar: Vu 


Ne 


aU AGUA | Wigs ga sao Beatea: steaiea 
amit faemunzEgaia agqralagetatacagigaaat ge: 
MAQMaAMa Bad MaaaaaMnsAagqarqagae Qeaiarag | 
atagqiageataat Marat Mesad ediqgeqarwiat waar: ofarnt 
AUMTHsIAATA GSMs aa Farisara v 

aul a aaaagizarargy | 

MAIUSATHITS (AACHr TisoiaMTS | 

az WaAAABAMeAadensA: AAD: 

ASVTSAAN ASAT SHABGBUS UIST: | 

WMHAAS HSA AHP GET Ala AAS I 

falaaaaijaatiea: talesiaauacgar Greeqa: | 

AAR TAGs aATaAT: Weagnlagar 


*% 0 AS 
SULIT Sea TNH ITTTATITM | 
aa Tiskearat weap rt ay aes Reh 

Sloka 21.—There would neither be prosperity nor 
rain in the land, should the clouds be rough and small, 
tossed about by the winds, have the shapes of camels, 
crows, dead bodies, monkeys or other inauspicious 
creatures and be silent. 

at A Mi: | 


SATS FAA YH APSHA: | 
QIAATFBUIA AQT: GTHSBATT: Ul 


232 gqrateararg [Adh. XXIV. SI]. 22-26. 


Raat a Aaa Araaagaqga: assay | 
at £4 5S fay gycret Gagtas sie aT gre NI 

Sloka 22.—If the Sun should shine with burning 
rays in a cloudless sky and the sky at night with bright 
stars look blooming like a lake rich in lilies, there would 
be copious rain. 

A ~ i a A ALA 
TiHas Tag sequaaaaeda ART: | 

~\ e awa axa ar Cc d \ ~ 

ary Ta Aizd THASE WMG: Array Towers UR 
qTASAaTNTTUS: GAT St Bes FeaMBMager | 
AG AA MMseaenssANsad fey aT earls eel 

Slokas 23-24.—If the clouds are formed in the east, 
there will be growth of good crops; in the south-east, 
there will be raging of fires; in the south, decay of crops; 
in the south-west, destruction of half the crops; in the 
west, handsome rain; in the north-west, stormy rain in 
some places ; in the north, very good and full rain and in 
the north-east, bumper crops. The same effects should 
be predicted of the wind also arising in the several 
directions- 


searfatiaemneasatas eaeAaaaaaeat: | 
aat aaTt ATALANTA Wal TWarrsa AT NAN 


Sloka 25.—Fall of meteors, flashes of lightning, 
thunderbolts, false fires in the quarters, portentous 
sound in the sky, earthquakes and the cries of birds and 
beasts produce the same effects as the clouds under the 
above conditions. 


Mangravrmniegea: aehaer raroraragas | 

Ta: @ ara: afewe ara Tarale: aieeecaqa: 124i 
Sloka 26.—The four water-pots beginning with the 

northern one should be named after the months 


Adh. XXIV. SI. 27-28.] safdeitsvara: 233 


beginning with Sravana, in the dextral order; if any of 
the pots be full of water, the particular month signified 
by that will have good rain. If, on the other hand, any 
one be empty, that month will have no rain. The amount 
of rain in the several months will have to be guessed 
from the quantity of water left in the pots. 

(aal @ TT: | 

aza g arao aeaegs wes az. 

afatsagat 37: Tah Bas fag: 0 

ae GIA FW: eqeatar: arPaagar: | 

aq avtery Agra aay aga ataa: tt 

aaqaraie: meer iony | 

qaaaiiaea aeaasar WeAats: 0 
HAY FRAATAAASsANS AA TAAT =| 
aa Geeqaae: qwiavas Teast TaTASIT NRol! 

Sloka 27.—Similarly, through other pots bearing the 
names of kings, countries or other things, the fortunes 
of the several people or things should be predicted 
according to the circumstances, when the pots are broken, 
empty, containing a little water or full. 

AUT A BISTT: | | 

MeIAMSa: BI aa @ Aaa a | 

aeaerar Rarars ashrarsat Tot] 

A very easy method of finding out the particular king@em or 


kingdoms to be attacked by a sovereign is given here. If he 
violates this rule, he is sure to be defeated. 


qn fraenisaat galt eat ge aqrag Rea: | 

x (os iN bal ~ \ 

fem aig gai aaat Hea saat Ala Weil 
Sloka 28.—If the Moon standing south, far or near, 

should conjoin with Rohini, there would result terrible 


disaster to the! world. 
q./a. 30 


234 qeecigarara, [Adh. XXIV. SI. 29-32, 


eaaaratia Ul VARA gatagarrant | 
mAITTMITTAA Bila se get Aa Tesi 
Sloka 29.—If the Moon touching Rohini goes north- 
ward, there will be good rain, but many disasters. But 
if she should pass to the north without touching the 
group, there will be copious rain and prosperity to 
mankind, | 


Wheniaacasqdied FRTATUSa Tat: | 

wife area fagatrarga: aaafhracneaaira: | olt 
Sloka 30.—When the Moon is posited in the centre 

of the wain of Rohini (Adhyaya IX-25, supra), the 

people will roam about helpless, their children procuring 

food for them and drinking water from Sun-heated 

vessels, 


ota ae faditafa aad gaa Tia titan | 
TauI AI Mela saan: Hilaaat a aera: 132i 
Sloka 31.—If the Moon should rise first and Rohini 
rising later follows, it augurs well for mankind, and 
amorous ladies will be stricken with love and yield to 
their lovers. 


agree Wa: Tat ae sat aitathrs frary | 
TRATTTAA: WAAL TAMAS AT? WRI 

‘ Sleka 82.—If the Moon follows;Rohini from behind 
just as a lover does his lady-love, men will become 
victims to Cupid’s arrows and be under the influence of 
their beloveds. 


mazar ef axa ait atanaadl qery 
Aaeat agrgena Prat cans araharys | 


Adh. XXIV. SI. 33-35.] saféetrseara: 235 


maaetar Raat aaa weaqay 
TS Mayet YR Fret: Tadaorreas 133i 
Sloka 83.—When the Moon stands southeast of 
Rohini, there will be great calamities ; when south-west, 
all the crops will be spoiled; being smitten with land- 
plagues; when northwest, the growth of crops will be 
middling; and when northeast, there will be many 
advantages, good growth of crops, higher prices and the 
like. / 
aa a aaraaearary 
sqaiy a gealsin: qatavdsaar Reva: areata | 
aff wata ag agar wala fazer sgesar ii 
Tqaniswsieser Meqraaia wszs a1 
fe Seaet: nana: Het wala u 
feiageueaead axet afargiecat | 
SAASATAM AT ALT AA FATA Il 


asaae FT Aqacararznls aga aay att 
Wey WagTed TOT Sea TITPSHaSa? vil 
Sloka 84,—If the Moon should cut across the pro- 
minent star of the group or hide it with her disc, there 
would be terrible peril and the king’s murder by a 
woman respectively, so say the wise. 
Yoga Tara is generally the brightest of the group. 
AAW | ar are siya | 
ATAU Br Meet aarant gaa: 0 
MATTAASHA IT Ala HrTyesr at ge: | 
Bt aU TIS FT Ava ai asrgafmerage: NaI. 


Sloka 85.—If, at the time of the cows returning 
home, a bull or a black animal (such as a goat) takes 


236 geeaigaraa [Adh. XXIV. Sl. 36. 


tows 


the lead, there will be much rain; if the animal be 
black and white, there will be medium rain, and if 
white, there will be no rain at all. A proportionate 
estimate of the quantity of rain is to be made with the 
animals of other colours. 

These views accord with those of Garga: 

aal a TW: : 

MENA TF YUM Fiat Twat art 

Tae SIT at TyIgaena: i 

HO F a: QIAa Haars Aezw | 

Watay a deat ata: ABT aeq7z: 

Mag Set Nar ara ear ear | 

TES AMAA WATT Bit Vat tl 

ape waar Rat Rar g aaa | 

Wea Arqast ar stsaaieg(aacat i 

altar qiaa ay ator aa cagdia i 


But Parasara adds: 
If an elephant, a horse or achariot should enter the town 


first in the evening of the Rohini-Yoga-day, there will be success 
in war; if a monkey, an ass, acamel, a mongoose, a cat or 
a dog should so enter, there will be troubles. If a blind man 
should enter first, there will be fear from thunderbolts. 
aa 4 qa: | aMeAadart gaara faitaeqe- 
mead | ay Tiss quant aacailvagwaratwaa 
erate a 
eaqa a ae wienigageza ama aaa | 
WAT HEU Tal YA YtaoraqAgat Fail 
Sloka 86.—If the Moon when in conjunction with 
Rohini is not visible owing to the sky being overcast 
great danger from sickness is imminent, bat the earth 
will be provided with plenty of water and grain. 


‘Thus ends the 24th Adhyaya “onthe Moon’s Conjune” on 
with Rohini ”. 


Adh. XXV. SI]. 1-3] = Taafaatrseara: 237 


nen amas —eenoeneers: 


eaaatasara: U4! ~The Moon’s Conjunction 
wiih Swati. 


Swati yoga means the period of a day when the Moon passes 
through the star Swati in the month of Ashadha. 


ARAMA KS ALA AMalawusiaed a ag t 
ainens fates race aistay Rarreaad ares 1211 
Sloka 1.—The same effects as for the Moon’s con- 
junction with Kohini apply to her conjunction with 
Swati and Ashadha. But the observations have to be 
made in the bright half of the month of Ashadha. I 
am now going to explain the special features of this 
latter conjunction. 
aM AQUA: | aa Ga aa ews waa arzag: wa: 
aimaqagd eadaga agate aaieavae ale ataqenrarswigdater 
satarga qiaaatara ageaaaangaia gia gseaiaaiansaiqaiaa 
faqaain 
ara Frater TARAS | aaa aang ratiea TET 


ba 


ant fea faSAAT ase Talasiea SRUCUCMIERL 
Tesigat Tay qaibaaagda ¢ awe | 
~ \ AA CA “ 
TST WATS fiReqaagy Te 121 
Slokas 2-3.—If it rains in the first four-hour period of 
the night during the Moon’s stay in Swati, all field- 
products will thrive ; the second part, sesamum, 
green gram and black gram will thrive,and in the third, 
summer crop alone will flourish and not the autumnal. 
If it rains in the first part of the day, there will be 
excellent rain during the year. In the second, the effect 
will be the same coupled with insects and snakes; and 


238 geaiearany [Adh. XXV. SI. 4-5. 


en ee emmammnesemneemmmeameiiintion 


in the third part, the rain will be moderate. If there 
rain both day and night, there will be very good rain. 

TUT SG Wat: | 

waaay aar qe qua casita | 

aisnaneqazqai at aararragag i 

wagarransesy alas | 

azqal grant erat aaa 

SHamamate aaal: wraainshadea 1 

Ma ara Ge ane g Aaa ti 

ARG TUT wit walgagzer | 

xara sen gedgawattaq: ii 

weEaduay F arvqat Sea aay | 

MUA Bat Ty Caraga FweTT: 

al F VAN Bag aareagia araa: ui "ra- 

TAIT ae Fears wea qataza: | 


TAA Wee Maal: Pat vale uv 

Sloka 4.—There is a star due north: of Chittra 
called atiaza —Apam Vatsa—“ little one of water”. 
The conjunction with Swati taking place when the 
Moon is near the above star proves beneficial. 


aaeat asa aie sala Ra wMaaaeTRT 
TA Weary: aAoATI aly aspera | 

fgemawes ar aie vata adt aeaexHatt 
Axa MIST geasasa! AATAS IAT WI 


Sloka 5.—If during the Moon’s conjunction with 
Swati there is snow-fall on the 7th day of the dark half 
jn the month of Magha, or if the wind is head-long, or 
the clouds thunder frequently, or if the heavens where- 
from the Sun, the Moon and the stars have disappeared, 
are filled with wreaths of lightning, one may be sure that 


Adh. XXV.6., XXVI.1.] vefasitseara: 239 


the rainy season will be rich in all sorts of crops, glad- 
dening mankind. 
aya Hey BX Taraarfrash ar t 
area arta a aga: ust 
Sloka 6,—In the same manner, one should consider 
the Moon’s conjunction with Swati when occurring in 
the month of Phalguna, Chaitra or the dark half of 
Vaisakha and particularly in the month of Ashadha. 
The commentator Bhattotpala is of opinion that this Sloka 
is spurious (not belonging to the text). 


Thus ends the 25th Adhyaya on “ the course of the Moon’s 
Conjunction with Swati.” 


AMRA ANEMIA Rll The Moon’s Conjunction 
with Ashadha. 


Ashadhee Yoga means the period of a day when the Moon 
passes through the asterism of Uttarashadha in the lunar month 
of Ashadha. 


mate anawantairaameagictaagi] ary | 
agtdala a saa aga aeasiery aaa gonRacrTg 

Sloka 1.—At the time of the full Moon in Ashadha, 
take equal weights of several kinds of seeds and keep 
them for a night being sanctified with the Mahavrata 
hymn. Such seeds as increase in weight will flourish 
and such as have diminished will not thrive. The 
hymn in praise of the balance that is used for the 
purpose of weighing is the following: 

Oe i A 

arasqaugarsat sroncerer Se fx | 

qaracafwes ate wigeh ara area 


240 aueatgaratag [Adh, XXVI, SI. 2-6, 


eR TERRE a ete rw, 


cae EE ETT ACRE ERR eer Meenas Rene meEnemeNIT  WeIEiiqmnieMOREATy, 


at a qnlaargaranay 
gimaiyataaaasaagts wata ata | 
ANSTO agg AAAHA SAA u 
WAST AAA Tar 2at ata | 
TAMA BAA Aa TIAA AA Ul 
Taq AAA ARAL WET SAAN TTATAT | 
BVABeds TAN GaqeeMt aaa a 3" 
UA AAT AAA AAI | 
Tae Ay BRI TAAE TAqATT 18! 
aa gana wamigaia waifaar | 
BTN WaT aad ayat Tar uel 
Slokas 2-5-—~-The balance should be _ invoked 
through ‘the following hymns: ‘“ As the Goddess of 
speech is verily Truth, you will show yourself situated 
in truth, being of the Vow of Truth. May that Truth 
appear here, the Truth by which the Sun and the Moon 
the planets and the hosts of stars rise inthe east and 
set in the west, the Truth which exists in all the Vedas, 
in the vedic scholars and in ali the three worlds You 
are the daughter of Brahman, well-known by the name 


of Aditya, by the family of Kasyapa and by the popular 
name of Balance. 


ay VasaARA AIS TERT ATTRIB AAT | 
GAIA F eagle qeq BEATA TTT Hen 


Sloka 6.—The vecale: -pans should be of silken cloth 
six inches long and wide fastened with four strings 10 
inches long, and the cord by which the’ “balance Ys held 
between the two scales is 6 inches in length. 


Adh. XXVI. SI. 7-10.] weftetsvaran: 241 


ary fret Goat aad Jexsawqarseyir Aa | 
A ba 
aa: Hear Seas: area alwelar erat sraqr F Ill 
e *. ~ %\ 
adam tiga stat tar yan ersa fare: | 
TCA Tata aa AeRsTTETiN tcl 
Slokas 7-8.—Gold should be placed in the right 
hand pan while all other articles as well as water in 
the left hand one for purposes of weighing. Weigh 
severally the waters of wells, rivers and lakes. The 
rain will be meagre, moderate and copious according 
as well, river and lake water proves the heaviest. The 
value of elephants is determined by the amount of ivory 
they have; of cows, horses and the like, by their hair ; 
of kings, by the amount of gold in their treasuries; of 
Brahmins, Kshatriyas, etc., as well as of countries, years, 
months and quarters, by beeswax; and of other sub 
stances, by their actual weight. 


Al AAA TAMA ALA TaTSTA Alera wrai | 
AS: gary Va BT Al at Tal Waa wafKalets Wt 


Sloka 9.—A golden balance isthe best; one of 
silver is middling. In the absence of the above two, 
it shall be made of @fat Khadira (Acacia catechu) wood, 
or it shaJl be made ofa shaft by which a man is 
wounded. The length of the, balance should be twelve 
inches. 


An inch is the space covered over by 8 grains of barley 
placed side by sidg—or that of three grains of barley placed 
lengthwise. It is also the breadth of the human finger. 


eiae araseateee qeeqeta get Tet Toray! 
CALS AATH TATATSY aa zea Ue ot 


; q. 4. 31 ; 


242 qeeaivarary [Adh. XXVI.SI. 11-12, 


Sloka 10.—Such substances as, again being weighed 
prove to have diminished in weight, will be lost; such 
as have increased will thrive; such as continue in the 
same condition will be indifferent. This is called the 
secret of weighing treasures with the balance. This 
applies equally to the Moon’s conjunction with Rohini 
also. 

qa | Wi: 

aati waa at a aaa a aaAZ | 

ait g dae at agi ara aaa 

aatia g aa eqeguar geet gu 

TM SW TWAT: 

anastala aarat agit a fasashy | 

Hea ALAR aeeEAiug Bstqs 1 

wai ia waeareqarerd ofanfraaa 

areata Aarfargrat Rraraaaza un gf- 


Maraneray denis wage aera a Tat | 


Tea ¢ ancaagass aarfraat fegoitaats 2 2h 


Sloka 11.—Evil planets standing in Swati, Uttara- 
shadha or Rohini during the Moon’s conjunction cause 
misery in the land. In the case of an intercalary Asha- 
dha month occurring, one should observe both the lunar 
conjunctions with devotional fasting. 

aur a da: 

Wat: wees: AMAA AT 1 

gtigratarera ase: aftieraizag u 

SA ST IWUAU—: YReTTTeTAGMNA yearafasaygtearn: ¢ 
deer acdeerana via nerete: | Sindaghraragatarasre: ¢ 
Whaanaahed: garda esr v 
TAS Ga ACA? GIA Tat at aeqqagaa | 


fred’ afag dikes. ne atnrats Arq tke 


Adh. XXVI. Sl. 13-15.] teféeitseara; 243 


Sloka 12—When the results of the Moon's con- 
junctions with Rohini, Swati and Ashada are the same, 
the prediction—good or bad—is to be made unhesita~ 
tingly. If they be different, the effects of Rohini alone 
will prevail. 


Preqhaemat a aeaecia wera ST | 
TESTA FSI YAT T TAA: Trae UL 


Sloka 13.—According as the wind blows from the 
east, south-east, south, etc., during the Moon’s conjunc- 
tion with Ashadha, the consequences are in their order 
as follows: good harvest, raging of fire, little, middling, 
very good rain, copious rain accompanied by winds, 
abundant and beneficial rain. 


TAIT SUITALA HINTS | 
ae atid qsieas svat Te A AA Ta? U2 
Sloka 14 —If, after the full Moon in the month of 
Ashadha, the rain God pours down rain on the 4th day 


of the dark half at the asterism of Purvashadha, the 
rainy season will prove beneficial ; otherwise, not. 


aiat detarat gq warishel wa | 
He aay dente Tea eaat 124i 


Sleka 15.—If there is a north-easterly wind on the 
fall:moon day of Ashadha at sunset, there will be an 
excellent growth of crops. 


Thus ends the 26th Adhyaya on “ the Moon's Oonjunction 
with Ashadha.” 


444 guediterara, [Adh. XXVII, SI. 1-2- 


qTaraaRZ U9! ~The Wind Circle. 


It is said that this chapter is not by Varahamihira but is 
an insertion. 


qa Taagaalatracrestect Zit - 
AA YACGSTTNSA TTAB | 
ARMM SATITS ITA aT 
TAPASTAAAVTATST Aa AN Drag ul 


Sloka 1.—If on the day of the full.moon in Ashadha 
an easterly 'wind blows from heaven, being tossed by 
the stroke of the tops of the billows of the eastern 
ocean and mingled with the mass of the mane-like rays 
of the Sun and the Moon, the whole earth will shine 
being enriched by the splendid vernal and autumnal 
crops and being covered overhead with groups of dark 
clouds every-where. 

TAWA agqusaaunenisay~: 
gaatig ar anata Tay Tazaie | 
aa freaiqn sasahiatiotqaret 
“, Ly os 
MAHSPIAAA TWAT AAT seT RI 

Sloka.2.—When the wind blows with such force as 
if to break off the peaks of the Malaya Mountain from 
the south-zastern part of the sky at sunset on the same 
fyll-moon day, the earth, blazing continuously with the 
flames: of fire embracing (spreading on) its surface, will 
emit heaps of ashes along with the hot breath emanating 
from its ownjbody. | 

al agi agdata Tit eteatg? is another reading. 
_— i. 
aisha gat salt: Teg ager cy: | 


Adh. XXVII. SI. 3-5] adféaitsvara: 245 


 Aaeirageraey aaraee as eat: 
atarat ga wearer gata FereTaT RN 
Sloka 3—When at the above conjunction a very 

rough and howling south-wind blows, making the mon- 
keys dance through the leaves of palm-trees, bowers of 
creepers and trees, the clouds rising like the elephants 
which are struck and pricked by the goad shed a few 
drops of water like miserly persons. 


In the 8rd oz, aletagaaa is another reading. 


aRiowseTHATTT a AAT 
Was Graal agaar sha | 
SIMIAN A TRSTATANASAy 
Wa HAT Migaet waar sea lvl 
Sloka 4.—If at sunset on the same day a south- 
west wind blows unceasingly tossing up and down in 
the sea heaps of small cardamoms, averrhoas and cloves, 
then the earth shrouded by 2 heavy load of scattered 
broken bones of men who have perished by hunger and 


thirst, appears wild and restless like a young lady just 
losing her husband. 


Tal WING: MaasaaTaTT 
HAR TNS RAHTHTITTTAT | 
TI Galial TawterTgaa 
faa: arena ttaaarataelae i) 
Sloka 5.—If, at the time of the disappearance of 
the Sun’s rays, there is a strong gale from the west, 


raising dust with its beating wings, the earth will be 
endowed with rich crops and have the leading monarchs 


246 qeeargerar = =[Adh. XXVII. Sl. 6-8. 


engaged in war and consequently will be filled with huge 
masses of marrow, flesh and blood. 


madittee aie Perciearaearrray 
MIST CIN TATAIT? TAMNSATSTE | 
MAASAI AMSaAeal FRARRI 
aUrwMasat Garyera apwariardig at 


Sloka 6,—At the approach of sunset on the full- 
moon day of Ashadha, ‘if the north-easterly wind be 
very strong, have a dense appearance and resemble 
broken bodies of serpents (or Garuda), then it should be 
known that the earth will possess the fulness of blessings, 
on account of great happiness, caused by the all-round- 
growth of splendid crops and torrents of rain, wherein 
the frogs rejoice and croak continuously. 

yer sas glearrarad Tt 
TAA ATATTITT AAT: | 

Reguieaareateansaaaag TaZ7 
TAM FT ALATA Tt TaeTTEAT A: iboli 

Sloka 7.—If, at the end of the Grishma Season (4, e. 
full-moon of Ashadha) when the mass of the Sun’s rays 
is screened by Mount Meru, a northerly breeze blows, 
disseminating the fragrance of the sweet-scented 
Kadamba flowers, the clouds will inundate the earth 
with water, as though mad (crying madly as it were), 
and intoxicated by the sight of splendid illumination 
caused bythe flashes of lightning and destroying the 
rays of the Moon on the earth. 


* Meqerrafeet agaré at era | 
4 at aavet aca ar tat a aaa lel 


XXVIL 9, XXVIII. 1] werftetseare: 247 


Sloka 8.—If the sky be without the rays of the Sun, 
the Moon and the stars, and if there be-no rain, then, 
I think it cannot be called Bhadrapada. 


The sloka is spurious, says the Commentator. 


aay as Plasisarait: Aasaaral AIT 
gamertag: TIS eT: I 
MM CHANTAL AAA ATATA_SI 
afign sara aaaat vated aaterat |e 
Sloka 9.—If the north-easterly breeze be cool, 
scented by the flowers of Punnaga, Agaru and Parijata, 
be sonorous and be enjoyed by groups of Gods, the 
earth restored to youthful vigour will be full of water 


and crops, and kings will curb their enemies, will protect 
all class of people and with the utmost justice. 


Thus ends the 27th Adhyaya on the Wind Circle. 


ATTN SAT: lR¢l Signs of Immediate Rain. 


THAN afooiasd Ulyanae We 
OH Aa aaa We aT Hea THT | 
eT: TYTATS TWICSSTTATA: 
MIAS Baa a PrervaeaRraaishs Wek 
Sloka 1.—lf, at a query regarding rain, the Moon 


be posited in the Lagna which is a watery sign (Kataka, 
Makara, Kumbha or Meena) or in the 4th, 7th or 10th 
house in the bright fortnight, there will be plentiful 
rain ere long in the monsoon, provided she is aspected 
by benefics. If she be aspected by malefics in the 


248 | qeeaigerarg = [Adh. XXVIII. Sl. 2-3. 


above Yogas, there will be very little rain. In predict- 
ing rain, Venus should be treated on a par with 
the Moon during the rainy season. 

The commentator asks the question:—When the Lagna is 
a Kendra already, what is the meaning of %-x7:? Does it mean 
a Kendra other than the Lagna? Yes, it does. The idea of the 
author is this: There will be rain, etc., in the dark half when 
the Moon is in Lagna Kendra alone and not elsewhere, while in 
the other half, even in another Kendra, it is all right. 


aur @ qaragigararay 
auiaa cge seen Svs ait seary | 
Ws ar Harel werssd Bers: Te: 
ME gst wala ait ar ak qeasas ar 
aaa aaa ale at aaaraiegat a | 
WT Tea awsntaigiea MATa 
TSTHlS Awaiats a AT Ty Tse lel 
Sloka 2.—If the querist touches any wet object or 
water or any other liquid (pearls, etc.), or stands near 
water, oris about to do something connected with water 
or liquid, or, at the time, the word ‘water’ be heard in the 
place, then he should be told that there is rain ere long 
without any doubt. 
aut @ anradigaag 
ARTA ASS ABASIAaANIAaAeqAza! | 
saa gialeastaeleear 
gaaaalaera: faraiganita: | 
aaah guissaarane Raa 
mags at DNA: @ qaisdsy aterg 131 
Sloka 3.—If, during the rainy season, the Sun at 
rising cannot be looked at on account of his dazzling: 


Adh. XXVIII. Sl. 4-6.] aer&ersvara: 249 


ar cane aetaetc rea ey Cee, 
rer eanaeemeenmnenmnneliamats 
TTC — TRA eet OR Be weme —— teereeecinnemee aie eee TAIN mS ene i eee SN dite AT TENN ater tr 


brilliance and appear like molten gold, or possess the 
pure lustre of beryl, or if he burns with intense heat 
at the zenith of the sky, there will berainon the very 


same day. 
~~ 


fwagesk sierra atgaar ar 
VANAH A? BATA AT F waaT | 
Taralaay: qigad am aoniteat 
AATATH MTT HBVTARTT? UU 
Sloka 4.—The following are the symptoms of rain 
— tasteless water, the sky of the colour of cow’s eyes 
or crow’s eggs, uncontaminated directions, moisture of 


salt, calm wind, much tumbling of fishes ashore and the 
repeated croakings of frogs. 


WISN WARN aaisaeat 
Berat aaa aeaaeas | 
wart adsay saaeat: 
AeNG Toad Ul 
Sloka 5.—Cats scratching the earth very much 
with their nails, accumulation of rust on iron or bronze 


vessels with a musty smell and construction of bridges 
on the high roads by children indicate immediate rain. 


In the 3rd 1a, frgfriaates is another reading. 


fiedissarquatrar ae a qeahregaeatt: | 
eaagidatrntan wae: afiag wear ngit 
Sloka 6.—Mountains resembling heaps of collyrium 
or their'caves wrapt in vapour and haloes of the colour 
of cock’s eyes round the Moon, are indications of rain. 
q. a, 32 


250 axtafearara [Adhe XXVIII. SI. 7-11, 


Aaa Ansaaaivasmisaesaara: | 
quate eaRaat wiihrans wat gd a Well 


Sloka 7.—Ants shifting their eggs without any 
trouble, snakes mating and climbing down the trees 
and cows’ stampede, are signs of rain. 


AWMVATTMAL HRoAl Aadskaaesiaqran: | 
ae @ nat atanget Froals ait ar ator cil 


Sloka 8,—If the chameleons perched on the tops of 
trees fix their gaze on the firmament, and cows look 
up towards the Sun, there will be rain without much 
delay. 


aeoiled frida Tages TT, Beals | 
TI TYAS HHT TIE? qaaifa fateag bAu 


Sloka 9.—If the domestic animals such as cows are 
reluctant to go out of the house and shake their ears and 
hoofs, or, if the dogs behave in the same manner, it 
should be declared that there will be rainfall soon. 


qar faa TeTeSy SHU eciea at ale fad fraegen: | 
Ra aszak a Rareieeaa act gar wala aaa ator th 


Sloka 10.—When dogs stand on the roofs of houses, 
or bark continuously looking up towards the heavens, or 
when lightning is seen flashing from the north-east at 
day-time, then the earth will be completely filled with 
water. | 


grandest agtas act Rana | 
Masat Taare cad vata ake act ate as 1122 


Adh. XXVIII. Sl. 12-14] eerttetrsvara: 251 


Sloka 11.—When the Moon has the red hue of the 
eyes of a parrot or pigeon or of honey, and when a 
second Moon shines in the sky, there will be immediate 


rain. 

afad fate fiat Rat stata aie qeaq(aa: | 

Gta: grag aaa ae alsea aaissaay wag UR 
Sloka 12.—If there be peals of thunder at night 

and blood-red lines of lightning, ‘standing erect like rods 


at day time, and if there be a cool breeze blowing from 
the east, there would be immediate rain. 


TWlat WTAITaL AAS 
ward aie aaatgiAfeg: | 
aaed Tig a adlaeTat- 
CONTA Aaa ACT ASA Aa: 23 
Sloka 138.—If the sprouts of creepers are turned up 
towards the sky, birds bathe in water or dust, and 


creeping worms betake themselves to the tips of grass, 
there will be an immediate fall of rain. 


ARGRMTAMTHTAATN AAI 


WUSTAIF ATI ACITTAT: | 
TOA AARS TEA A TAT: 
TTTZZARA TF Poy TesewaT: leit 
Sloka 14.—At dawn or twilight, if the clouds 
show the same colour as pea-cocks, parrots, blue-jays 
or Chataka birds, or have the lustre of roses, and red 
lotuses and resemble in shape waves, hills, crocodiles, 
tortoises or fishes and are piled up with many folds, 
they will pour down rain before long. 


252 —- geeaiGarara [Adh. XXVIII. Si. 15-18. 


ATES Hat a SY NORE SON eT RNS Lee Eten tees tna 


eee oem Oca sR Rs ILIAD CNPP NN TELL, 


TaeqY AAIMFIIS Aeassariaieay: 
Raa dagen: aaon: aaaassea: | 
MEAT AAEANA! APAUTITT AKA 
Ua Titgataated ATTA Ty BA 1k 
Sloka 15.—If the clouds are as white as chunam 
or the Moon at the edges, as dark as collyrium or 
bees at the centre, glossy, have many folds, (¢.¢e., appear 
piled up) dropping particles of water, and breaks like 
the steps of a stair-case, and being formed in the east 
sail westward or vice versa, they yield plenty of rain 
to the earth before long. 
THIN wMedsy asa: aR: | 
sama ale wmaluiggerywary ary 2st 
Sloka 16.—lf at sunrise or sunset. there is a rain- 
bow, across bar of clouds, a mock Sun, a straight frag- 
mentary rainbow, flashes of lightning, and halos round 


the Sun and the Moon, it should be predicted that there 
will be plentiful rain in the near future. 


For the definition of wi?a vide Adhyaya XLVI-20 infra. 
aie fararqataa are gigat: sagied az 
searaaa aged Rasta sat aT Tea 129i 

Sloka 17.—If the sky bears the tinge of the wings 
of the Tittira bird, and groups of birds twitter merrily 


at sunrise and sunset, then the clouds will pour down 
rain soon by day and night respectively. 


This verse is spurious, says the commentator. 


TTAAKOT ATATNTMTIAT CEA: | 
Wad 4 Wa WaTeqaTeMEATNA eos iil 


Adh. XXVIII. S]. 19.) serfrettseara: 253 


Sloka 18.—If the Sun-beams called #@rq—unerring- 
are stretched upwards like the out-stretched arms of the. 
“setting Mountain” and if the clouds thunder close to 
the earth, they are to be understood to be important 
gigns of rain. 

For stata vide Adhyaya XXX-11 infra, 

am @ qalaaiearany 

Geslars Wear areoitezeat faaR ar | 

qinsreaeersangalsiaaeonscnss: 

atgara ween eauarat ae fear | 

BEIWSAgTa MIM seat Grae: It 

agragaarar fircat areqrgar afz ar | 

af asatgeara fagarat aya eR 

FATENAVAT frfifsersiragita: 

PRUSYSSRIUaASslaElasiaassear: I 

fara: Gag a faqas areafatrag | 

agaem: aiaty: sfaaeq: attaarea: qa: W 

RCAEUM AATAM ATT Resear | 

Rant: aniwavear quragearia Beratzeaa uv 

rad age ay Aegtat cagiar: i 

AU BF QUA: 

TVaAY AST Iaseszeqizy Wise | 

avag aaa qalahag Parag u 

seniftainyasrtigaaltt § waa: | 

wtasar seta fret aaig atat: u gfa- 


ara alaaT AITTET TAU ITT UAT: | 
PATUATATT TT THAN ASSSUTAATT 113 S11 


Sloka 19.—If in the monsoon the Moon being 
placed in the 7th house from Venus or in the 9th, 7th, 


er 9th house from Saturn, is aspected by benefics, there 
will be rain soon, 


254 quedigatara, [Adh. XXVIII. Sl. 20-24-. 


Ce a aeeal 


MA TAMITAAKS TATA WETATA F | 
qaay diengraaiea abaash Mata agg Rott 

Sloka 20.—Generally there will be rain during the 
planets” heliacal rising and setting, at the conjunction of 
the non-luminaries with the Moon, at their entering any 
of the six Mandalas*, at the end of a fortnight and 
a solstice, and certainly when the Sun is passing through 
the asterism ‘ Ardra ’ 

*Vide Adhyaya IX—10-21—supra. 

taps e a ax fC A_ aA 

AMMA Tala TS FIBA TATA AA | 
TAT WaAgATa we Tesaaleqas aye? NRX 

Sloka 21.—There will be rain at the conjunction of 
Mercury and Venus, of Mercury and Jupiter and of 
Jupiter and Venus. But at the conjunction of Mars and 
Saturn, there will arise peril from wind and fire, provided 
they are neither conjoined with nor aspected by any of 
the benefics. 

ama: Gat aisle wer: arrears | 
* Ce 
Ut Aa AZala AeRHTATHAT URI 

Sloka 22.—-/When the planets are about to be 
eclipsed by the Sun in front or behind (slower planets in 
front and faster ones behind), they convert the earth 
into an ocean as it were. 


afrafa ate aaa Secadiag tareig | 
Harearaas aia Taeet ag Nz 
ayeaty tafe aan srargey TaTIeTAT 
ANE Teale at Tat aT Areas vil 


Slokas 23-24,——-If there be glow-worms at night. 
near the clouds, before long there will be rain filling all. 


Adh. XXIX. S). 1-2.) vatafaeiseara: 255 


the fields, In spite of rain-fall, if jackals howl in the 
evening, there will not be a drop of water, though the sky 
be overcast for seven days at a stretch. This need 
not be doubted. 

These two verses appear to be spurious as they are not recog- 
mised by the commentator. 


Thus ends the 28th Adhyaya on “ Immediate Rain”. 


SFAVATATT XSI = Prognostics from Flowers 
and Creepers. 


HOFYAAMUS Tera Marea faq | 
gear seat freaky Taran eit 


Sloka 1—By observing the abundance of flowers 
and fruits of trees, the availability of all things in large 


quantities at cheap rates should be ascertained; so also 
the thriving of crops. 


TSA BOAYSl THA THAN | 
arEe: gitsar aoraidt GATH UR 


Sloka 2.—From the (luxuriance of the flowers and 
fruits of the) Sala tree, the prospects of Kalama rice are 
to be determined ; from the red Asoka, red rice; from 


the Ksheerika, yellowish rice ; and from the bluish Asoka 
hog’s rice. 


’ 


The Sala tree is known in Tamil as g##rws or wens, 
Itis probably the Diospyros Ebenaster furnishing timber, 

Kalama, A variety of white tice; it is sown in May and 
June and ripens in December or January-Qeeriréeiur, 

Ksheerika, The Fig tree-.94M@tos., 

Asoka. It is a tree of moderate size belonging to the 
leguminous class with magnificent red flowers-@=« suri, 

Sukaraka, A species of rice-e@t@se, 


256 guedt@arara [Adh. XXIX. Sl. 3¢5. 


aaa gy waaargnzen a Weal vale | 
aaaa Ha Heqk: waaay lll 
Sloka 8.—Through the Banyan tree, barley should 
be guessed ; through the ebony tree, the Shastika rice} 
and through the Aswattha, the success of all crops. 
Nyagtodha- The Indian Fig Tree- gow, 


Shashtika rice- A kind of rice of quick growth ripening iz 
about 60 days- a pusragGemna 


Aswattha- The holy fig-tree- 1 #10/u, 
eT AIA: Asa a Heeara: | 


SUPE REP CUCE ICME CUCM] 

Sloka 4.—From the Jamboo fruits (Rose-apples) are 
ascertained sesamum and black gram; from the 
sucess of Sirisha flowers is inferred the full growth of 
Priyangu; from the Madhuka tree, wheat; and from 
the Saptaparna, the rich growth of barley. 


Jambu- The Rose Apple tree-sr@s, Sireesha-@ rene, 


Kangu- A kind of panic seed. Madhuka tree- @gxvonts, 
Sapta Parna- oPfawurews, Yava-Barley-wene, 


Magwngeeat ea aang aca: | 
Titay HueatMetanspegrig ill 


Sloka 5.—From the Atimukta tree and the roun@ 
Jesmine is known the state of cotton crop; from the 
Asana tree, mustard ; from the Jujube fruits, horse-gram ; 
and from the Chirabilva or Karanja, green gram. 


Atimuktaka-6@4¢5@, Kunda-e@s, Sarshapa- Mustard 
geed-e@G, Karpasa- Cotton-@@M@, Asana-Gamens, Badari- 
Hess, Kulattha-Oerer@s, Chirabilva-yaensiwosid, Mudga- 
A sort of kidney-bean-@ gis gy, 


Adh. XXIX. SI. 6-9.]  qatafsitseara: 257 


Saat Tages: qoragaNs wHxat Far: | 
feta wgdiimatacag Yet ToT: NGI 
Sloka 6,—Atasi is to be determined from the 
flowers of Vetasa; Kodrava from the flowers of the 
Palasa tree; conch-shells, pearls and silver from the 
Tilaka tree and hemp from the Ingudi tree. 


Atasi-Common flax-s7#r, Vetasa-?rags@, Kodrava-@@, 
Palasa-45#, Sana-Hemp , Tilaka-wogerpwsw, Inguda-ergr, 


alia shannaesa aitaisaniia | 
Mag Test: azaleas wala wor 


Sloka 7—The price of elephants should be deter- 
mined from the Hastikarna trees; of horses from the 
Aswakarna; of cows, from the Patala trees; and 
of goats and sheep from plantains. 


Hastikarna-Castor oil tree-@osaréser s@ or Darien. Aswa 
Karna-g##700w-tatala, The Trumpet-flower-tree-u7 27, 


IR GN Fars Agaacag qgsiaa | 
HARI IW ATA aeTHIAA: NCI 


Sloka 8.—The abundance and cheapness of gold 
Should be inferred from the Champaka flowers; of 
corals, from the Bandhujeeva flowers; of diamonds, 
from the’ luxuriance of the Kuravaka trees; and of 
Vaidurya (beryl) from the Nandikavarta. 

Champaka-euuans, Bandhujeeva-Qauusr ao or °.F8 Siw seQeig.. 


Kuravaka-Crimson species of amaranth-eg@sref, Nandikavartas 
S6Pural_eanu, 


rare Regarte aes sree sqraa | 
| TRAST Ta eal alateadatan sn 


ala. 33 


258 geeaisararg [Adh XXIX. SI. 10-12 


HO Nee Ageneenwrnpe rats 


tetera Oman EON PUENTE 


Sloka 9.—One has to know pearls through the 
Sindhuvara tree ; artisans from saffron; the king from 
red Jotuses; and the minister from blue lilies. 

Sindhuvara-OsT¢@, Kusumbha-@usréQeu., 

ag aaNgeaaaiam: gaan gas: | 
anata Teale Reoqitay: oli 

Sloka 10.—Traders are indicated by Suvarnapushpa 
(golden flower); Brahmins, by lotuses; royal priests 
by lilies; the commander of the army, by the Saugan- 
dhika flower and the increase of gold, by the Arka plant. 


Suvarnapushpa-The globe amaranth-eawses, Saugandhika- 
The blue lotus-Qemeqér, Arka-1@séG, 


MR At BMRA Tighaartray | 
widqadivat Tagagea: Waa Bs 12 UH 
Sloka 11,—One shoald guess the happiness of man- 
kind from mangoes; danger from Bhallataka; health 
from Peelu; famine from the growth of Khadira and 
Samee trees ; and good rain from the Arjuna trees. 
Bhallataka-Gea#@srt_on, Peelu-omassru, Khadira-squerd, 


Samee-A tree possessing a tough hard wood supposed to 
contain fire-werefiosw, Arjuna-ugsus, 


frqarcagaa: aitaay aea: slid | 

faqeaaisad sated waa gedq 1220 
Sloka 12.—From the flowers of the Neem tree and 
anat-Naeakesara, abundance of food grains should be 
foretold ; from the wood-apple, wind; from the Nichula 
tree, danger of drought; and from the Kutaja tree, 

impending disease. 

- Pichumanda-Neem tree-Geuwy, Naga-yerder or Agsrad, 


Kapittha-dermuwst, Nichula-@féetwy, Kutaja-A variety of 
Jasmine-Gi-wedens, 


XXIX. 13-14, XXX. 1.] Prarsaiseara: 259 


qaiguagmeathartiqa Bilao 
TaAoalagen Teas afearared 2st 


Sloka 13.—The growth of sugar-cane is presaged by 
the flowers of Durva and sacred grass; outbreak of fire 
by the Kovidara tree; and the increase and prosperity 
of concubines by the luxuriance of the Syama creeper. 


Durva-Bent grass-aawye, Kusa-@*4y@, Kovidara- 
weussh or Glaragwosw, Syamalata-Country Sarasaparilla- 
won oy &) 5m Lp. , 


qa Bie aaa: aed Taqeat wary | 
aimegie: araat arafier eaRasgreraea: meeq UVM 

Sloka 14.—When trees, bushes and creepers are 
seen fully packed with glossy leaves without any inter- 
space, beautiful rain is then to be predicted; while if 
they are covered with rough leaves with inter-spaces 
very little rain is to be declared 


A4l A WATE: 
afsaqqar: qaran: Seqsragieazan | 
tagatea gu gat taqtia famFar: a 
Thus ends the 29th Adhyaya on “ Prognostics from 
Flowers and Creepers ”’. 


AeSASAMT KAT - (Roll The Indications at Dawn 
and Twilight. 


qgramrageng aicered vat Tg | 
TAT AeIaHSMaa: Ke anergy lel 
Sloka 1.—The interval during which the firmament 
contains indistinct stars before the Sun has half-risen and 


260 eeeararny [Adh. XXX. Sl. 2-4: 


pI RIN -cDpetcheMEhe ERE ea eet Y FE Pa Ce RPS PEAR RET PEE 


after he has half-set is called the juncture, ¢. e., dawn and 
twilight respectively. The effects—good and bad—of 
the juncture are to be foretold through the following 
symptoms. 

aM ST: 

RENNAA @: Aleg: A A aevar waiiaar | 

fraser watengaiaasaiaedaz tt 

aTagiaraaskaravaaaaaggealt: | 
WeTTATTATRAVSTT? ATTA | 

Sloka 2.—The deer, birds, wind, haloes round the 
Sun and the Moon, mock Sun or Moon, cross-bar! of 
clouds on the Sun’s disc at the juncture, tree-shaped? 
clouds, rainbow and the glossiness of an apparent town 
in the sky, Sun’s rays, a stick.like formation® caused by 
the collection of solar rays, clouds and wind and dust, 
-—-from these, the effects of the juncture are to be 
determined. 

1. This is an appearance in the sky of the shape of an 
iron bar. 

2. An appearance resembling a tree in shape assumed by 


the clouds. 
3. An appearance in the sky resembling a club. 


AVAFA ASL AUSTHEMAT AAAS | 
cachet Tora AeTaA: AeTTATT UR 
Sloka 3.—A beast (deer) dreadfully crying aloud 

repeatedly, indicates the destruction of the village, The 
same standing in the Sun to the south of an army and 
crying aloud, foretells the annihilation of the army. 

ATTY TEMA? AY Taraarara: Bred | 

BHU Ta a Aevaray fray ges vil 


Adh. XXX. Sl). 5-8] Prevaairseara: 261 


Sloka 4.—If at dawn or twilight a flock of deer 
or the wind be to the left of an army (and be facing 
the Sun), then ta war will break out; if it be to the 
right of the army, cries pleasantly (and is not facing 
the Sun), the two armies will come together; if it be of 
mixed characteristics, there will be rain. 


AIM AISA AH Aeeaqt TAATAATSATa | 
canitnattean sania gre egret: itl 


Sloka 5.—If at dawn there be cries of birds and 
beasts facing the Sun, it forebodes the destruction of 
the country. If birds and beasts, which with their faces 
glowing in the Sun send forth their notes, stand to the 
south of a city, the latter will be captured by the enemies. 

Yaad Aiguisienesits TS | 
Awad SA WAT Awa Aeeat 141! 

Sloka 6.—A dawn or twilight will be of dire con- 
sequences, if at the time a strong and rough wind blows 
making a howling noise, crushing houses, trees and 


arches, raising heaps of dust and clods of earth and 
throwing down birds from the sky. 


WAWMATTaaSatTsragat TTA aT | 
AAA aA HATGA TAA Aeear Ibs 
Sloka 7.—A dawn or twilight will prove beneficia) 
if the leaves of trees are slightly shaken by the impact 
ef a gentle breeze, or if there be no wind, and if animals 


and birds, not facing the Sun, send forth their melodious 
notes. 


aeeqHs ara seeqiencaaiareaa: | 
grrfaainaatisenarg geet licil 


262 = —«-_qedifiperar, [Adh. XXX. SI. 9-12. 


'Sloka 8—The following things being glossy at 
dawn or twilight betoken immediate rain. @%-Danda 
(vide Sloka 16, anfra), lightning, fish-like clouds, a mock 
Sun, ahalo, a rainbow, %aa-Airavata (vide Adhyaya 
XLVI—20 infra) and Sunbeams. 


ARaaaraasaapapgeswacantaat: | 

dagaltaoneias Aaaaiser: farts We 
Sloka 9—The Sun’s rays, which are broken off, 
unequal, discoloured, unnatural, crooked, turned anti- 


clockwise, slender, short, crippled (impaired) and soiled 
bring about war and drought. 


STAifaas WA BAa slat: aalaorraas | 
farm: fara aaa aaeHE TAA raga: 1201 
Sloka 10.—The Sun’s rays which are brilliant, 
pure, straight, long and turned in a clock-wise direction 
and which are seen in a bright sky, tend to the prosperity 
of the world. 
Js ae aga Sansaeteaanga: feavar: | 
AeA AAT TORU CTAIVATS 112 2H 
Sloka 11.—The white, glossy, unbroken and straight 
rays of the Sun, which pervade the whole firmament 
(from the beginning to the end), produce rain and are 
called ‘ Amogha’ or ‘unerring ’. 
aearauaiar Pramagetaaaaa: | 
farargataasreiseraagred aqerg Weil 
Sloka 12,—Greyish, tawny, russet, variegated, mad- 
der-hued, green and spotted rays stretching all over the 


sky (and turned upwards), are conducive to drought and 
produce some danger after a week. 


Adh, XXX. Sl. 13-16.] fawvadtseara: 263 


qa Totdsrey Viarenayary aqaaq | 
afta: waaead qaaanl wat aaq 123i 
aig Tatars qs: way | 

AMATMeIAUS TAT BIS HATA: levi 


Slokas 13-14.—Copper-coloured rays of the Sun 
cause the death of a general; yellow and rosy ones, his 
misery (or trouble from diseases); green ones, the des- 
truction of cattle; and smoky ones, the ruin of cows; 
madder-coloured rays cause trouble through weapons and 
fires; tawny ones, stormy rain; ash-coloured ones, 
drought ; and spotted and greyish rays occasion slight 
rain. : 

weqaqay is another reading for aaa. 


STRTAAAA RT gees sey gar Rare | 
SBMA Taadiadewa YH tH siatraeweqs uli 


Sloka 15,—lf, at the time of twilight, dust coloured 
like the Bandhuka flower (very red) or like collyrium 
powder goes up towards the Sun, mankind will then be 
afflicted by hundreds of diseases. White dust, at the 
time, betokens prosperity and peace to the people. 

Parasara says that if the rising or setting Sun should be 
covered by dust resembling the white powder of conch, princes 
will triumph in war and mankind will be happy. 

BUC SD’ GUT: 

aegtameraia avdtiaraa ars 

SAX THA Ya: Fa: TeTaaea Ul 

TEVA war azar ff: | 

ry iemaAteada WE gaaATZAT a It 


afeTascaeat AEA qveqqieral Toss 
a faiaeerat arorrmgal fag Raretary edu 


264 geedfterara (Adh, XXX, SI. 17-20. 
Sloka 16,—The collection of Sun-beams, clouds and 
wind, taking the form of a staff is called a Danda or rod. 
If the Danda is seen in the intermediate directions, 
misery will befall the kings, while, in the cardinal direc- 
tions, it forebodes evil to Brahmins, Kshatriyas, etc., 
respectively. 
TATTNITH CBs Maqyeqaieag eave | 
Baran fuciq aagaet feea Raq |e 
Sloka 17.—The Rod observed at dawn, noon and 
twilight produces danger from weapons (war) and 
diseases; while the same with white, red, yellow and 
dark colours destroys the four classes in order. Also, it 
destroys the particular direction which it faces. 


That part of the Rod which is near the Sun is called its 
bottom and the other end is its face. 


AAAI AS Wg ssial BAaTisnass | 
Hasg_RaAa TT Tae yRgTwH Uc 
Sloka 18,—Blue and tree-shaped clouds, which 
being situated at the zenith of the sky and having a curd- 
like top, screen ‘the Sun and those tinged yellow with 
a dense bottom, produce copious rain. 
ATHAMSAIS TA WA ATA IA ag: | 
THASHASAN Taare? 1128 hi 
Sloka 19—Ilf a cloud-tree moving in the same 
direction (behind). as a marching monarch disappears 
suddenly, the king will be killed; while the same in the 
form of a young tree (plant) denotes the death of the 
prince (Yuvaraja) and minister, 


qreaigaregaramenra TaRalyET | 
area wala aE Wag Rat ae Rel! 


Adh. XXX. S]. 21-23.] faarwatsvara: 265 


Sloka 20.—A twilight which has the hue of blue 
lily, bery] or lotus-filaments, which is free from wind 
and which is brightened by the Sun’s rays brings down 
rain the same day. 


AT UH ATT TIANA TTA ATA | 
MAY BUAAMACTA VARI UW 
Sloka 21.—A twilight which contains clouds in in- 
auspicious* forms, an aerial city, fog, smoke and dust, 
occasions drought in the rainy season, and clash of arms 


in other seasons 
*Like an ass, camel, a headless trunk, a crow, a cat and the 
like. 


Aue ani: aotataaarraaaar | 
nafraan: aseaar aal ge fgaeat zl 
Sloka 2.—In the six seasons beginning with winter 
the natural colour of the sky at twilight is in their order 
red, yellow, white, variegated, lotus-hued and crimson. 
Each colour is beneficial in its own season and harmful, 
if it is othcrwise. 
aAal Sl TWit: | 
qaea wyantarsrar SUA | 
mist Bar wsiteaen Gigagt @ wes | 
fiasiaggrat aevar aug andar | 
amsant ait freyarar a wera Ul 
gues agant @ fager ait Tsar! 
PART rorant @ aevar Wagarar 
Rava naa fas aaa WHS ar | 
aes BUgantar atealesTs war 


AATTAST Was aarara ce | 
RawytsRMea HaTA Yea arg: UR 


266 . qyeehRararg [Adh. XXX. Sl. 24-27. 


Sloka 23,——If a fragmentary cloud presents the 
appearance of an armed person and issituated near the 
Sun, there will be danger (to the king) from enemies. 
If a white aerial city (of clouds) is approached by the 
Sun, the town that is besieged by an enemy) will be 
victorious ; while if it is cut in two by the Sun, the town 
will be destroyed. 

fratararaaad wae aieat ae asa: | 
DCR COU CICE COICCRER CT Lorca cea] 

Sloka 24,—If the Sun is covered on the right side 
by clouds that are white or white-fringed, there will be 
rain. If he is screened likewise by clouds which are 
similar in appearance to the bushes of Andropogon grass 
and which issue from an unblasted quarter, the same 
result will ensue. 


qnantae wig: a: qatqeragIsHtsd | 
RABSTAU Fwalga: afrquanaisagida: 124 
Sloka 25.—A white cross-bar of clouds appearing at 
sunrise will bring about a king’s demise; a blood-red one 


will ruin an army through internecine warfare; and one 
with a golden hue will bestow prosperity on the army. 


SAIUATA Tat we AaAdaIBA TIMNATAy | 
AY AAMH_ Team: wtaqarsha Horwshy a anita: | 


Sloka 26,—If there are mock Suns touching the 
Sun on both sides, there will be abundant rain. Should 
they surround him on all the four sides, not a drop of 
rain would fall, 


AM ATATAT STATA: | 
TAA AMAA TTT THAAT: 11 Voll 


Adh. XXX, Sl. 28-30.] frawarssara: 267 


THSYAAATNAATA TSH: | 
TorIEIT_Ia Areca IATA |ReIt 
Aaitaq sarqan waenrHaa: | 

qan Bara aesaai: gaa qaraar: les 


Slokas 27-29.—At twilights, the clouds that have 
the shapes of a banner, umbrella, mountain, elephant, 
and horse, conduce to the victory of kings and the 
people; while blood-red ones tend to war. Those 
that are suspended like the mass of smoke from straw 
fire, and are smooth in appearance, make the armies of 
kings prosper. Those hanging low, resembling trees, 
shining brightly owing to their deep-red colour or looking 
like towns bestow prosperity. 


aiaaegiaaranger coewahtanzgar @ | 
HUCABARATA Al SAATAMAT AT lI olt 


Sloka 50.—If at a twilight birds, jackals and beasts 
that face the Sun cry out, if there are the Rod, dust, 
bolt and so forth, or if every day the Sun appears in an 
unnatural form, the destruction of a country, king and 
food will be the result. 


AU SB BSTT: | 

Rausqat ava qtears Tezaa | 
MUAY MAT Yar acagaiy ar | 
MHISAS Yulee: ToTIEnaarat: | 
aredt are quit: quat weetraw: 0 
war ata gar Har faqiiarsgar Sear | 
Sal a afsarrel mearzarangar ti 
Rava qenitaa graraaarear | 

fart adaar arcar aaritafagiear 


268 | qeeaigararm [Adh. XXX. Sl. 31-33. 


AA AANAT ARATE ACI Sargl Te 
ARAAW AIR Fated TH 7 eq I 
TRAARELHRNSAATRATTATT- 

ahaa RAseasy ea: age Bat 1321 


Sloka 31.—The dawn produces its effects—good or 
bad—at the same moment, the evening, on the same 
night or in three days; haloes, dust and ‘bolts’, in a 
week, if not the same day; the sun-beams (unerring, 
etc.), rainbow, lightning, mock-Sun, clouds and wind act 
in the same manner ; birds do on the 8th day, if not the 
same day, and beasts, in a week. 

UH aicen ais ala acsar Magar yz THraiRTa | 
gansatat wa and Beat araliaa Sageaaa Fe 

Sloka 32.—Twilight illuminates (and has effect 
over) one Yojana with its gleam; lightning ilumines 
with its flash six Yojanas; the sound of thunder extends 
over five Yojanas; and according to some there is no 
limit to the falling of meteors. 
aut a aae:) aecar g aise arfe fawarar asa fg | 

HaAsTEeg Tatat diaarat Gera: 
AEST ATA GVA Yar arscagariy aru ga 


waaaeg: Ward da awa aig aw | 


qrimesd GRA CTIA Tals 11331! 
Sloka 33.—The halo of the Sun called mock-Sun 
spreads lustre (and has influence) over three Yojanas; 
a bolt, (cross-bar of clouds), over five Yojanas; a halo, 
over five or six Yojanas; and the rainbow shows its 
lustre for ten Yojanas. 
Thus ends the thirtieth Adbyaya on “The Indications of 


Dawn and Twilight,” 
htapgersapetiaen 


Adh. XXXI. Sl]. 1-4.) qaMetseara: 269 


(AqSAMEIMT: 1123211 The Glow at the Horizon. 


alal feat usaata Hat Fae arara gaa: | 
TUN ACSIA? TAS aa a Bila Tas Vl 
Sloka 1.—The fire in the quarters, if yellow, indi- 
cates peril to the king; if fiery in colour, the ruin of the 
country ; and if rubicund and observed :with wind from 
the left, it causes destruction of the crops. 


GSH Sal Hot WHA SAAMI sas wsHnIT! | 
Wal AESTAT AF A VAAHGT AITTST Ril 
Sloka 2.—That, which owing to great brilliance 
creates illumination and reveals shadow also as the Sun 


does, portends great calamity to the king. A blood-red 
one indicates the raging of the sword (war). 


meakramt vacant saa freagardier | 
AFT TR FOG TVA TAL FAYTATTIA BUT Ri 
GAS Ah HIsitay Weaeqey: aE wgqTssr | 
diet ascageraa fro: grafted arftrsrata areata tt 

Slokas 3-4,—The fire seen in the east bodes evil to 
the Kshatriyas with their chieftains ; in the south-east, to 
the smiths and boys (or princes? ); in the south, to 
the Vaisyas along with cruel men; in the south-west, 
to envoys and widows that have remarried ; in the west, 
to Sudras and agriculturists; in the north-west, to 
thieves and horses; in the north, to the Brahmins; and 
in the north-east, to the heretics and merchants. 

Tae FT BAIA: | 

areat faft odterat selet waite | 

wnasat g Sareea eqeat fa ea y 


270 qeeaivarara, [XXXI. 5. XXXII. 1. 


Sn 


amat = war ea wars eieaserar | 
arasqrat sizaa Asrorge’ aa u 
qrafteatist drat aareat afe frewa gfe. 


aa: Tae ASA ANA Ae ais aera | 
Rat a ae: wrHaga ara see aniia|” us 
Sloka 5.—A calm sky, glossy and bright stars, breeze 
blowing in a clock-wise direction, and the fire at the 
horizon with the hue of gold, is for the good of mankind 
and kings. 
Thus ends the 31st Adhyaya on “ the Glow at the Horizon.” 


FRAISANETNT: VR! Signs of an Earth-quake. 


fataranges Teqrasaiataagay | 
AUMUSAS ATA TMATRT WET 121 
Sloka 1. Some hold that an earth-quake is caused 
by huge animals living in the midst of the ocean, while 
others opine that it is the result of the rest that is availed 
of by the elephants of the quarters tired by the weight 
of the earth. 
AUT ST BEIT: | 
areraint qeat atrerrererat | 
yal ASAAAIA AAA aAsaqleq ANZ tl 
aut A WH 
mare: qfaat arm areata wsteaa | 
qdart: GreMnagaas Jysar: 0 
adaray feet gat gael afert fer | 
gamafiqeeg atearat ¢ qysret: 
Maman we weas qgraca | 


Adh. XXXII. SI. 2-7] arf seara: 271 


a walea Aq wear: @ ary: afar Aerz 
ameaet areata wiaratara afearg | gta. 
ataisited Mea: Rat way aad Hae 
BTATTHIA AT AEA TAMA UA 
Sloka 2.—Yet, others there are who hold that it is 
caused by the atmospheric wind colliding with another 
and falling to the earth with a booming sound. There 
are still others who maintain that it is occasioned by 
some unseen power. Some more there are who declare 
as follows : 
ayt a afag: | 
aal % awarearyiratterfasrea: | 
Tay @ faaiat waghtaaeta: ti 
AA Biaiagaawsaeagar feria: 
asitmaaga: aGramaangtas: uv ze. 


aat A gTHaT: | 
TA Waal Ta aA BIT a az | 


wart waa fiat feaaza qiraar: u 

raqviaezar aq AaAMAyA ar | 

aaa saat g gamaiwaga uaa. 
MRA: ga aadga scafRectaeA | 
arata farmemeawaaia aaieq 1131 
WATAA WATUII FI UTAsla Ta Tat | 
PAISIVATIR: THs WA WTA NVI 

Tan angi febacegitarat Praag | 
agtaaaaaansea Marre: Te Wi 
WY aT aT: rT gee IorgayAT | 
TR HAAYe AUN Tgadtare uel 
frataqeaguidaem aqaenerata4dy | 

N bat ~ 

TBAT Ratan Keats isi 


272 avedftarara, [Adh. XXXII. SI. 8-10, 


Sloka 8-7.—In days of yore, the earth, being shaken 
severely by the winged mountains which flew up and 
down, spoke bashfully to the creator in the assembly 
of the Gods—*‘My lord, the name that has been given 
to me by you--namely #4@I-immoveable—is not quite 
right, for it is falsified by the flying mountains and Iam 
unable to put up with this misery.” Hearing these 
words of Mother Earth who was choked with tears, 
whose lower lip quivered slightly, and observing her face 
hanging down with tears trickling down from her eyes, 
the Creator spoke thus: ‘‘ Indra, remove this humiliation 
felt by Mother Earth; throw your thunderbolt and 
chop off the wings of the mountains.” At this, Indra 
saying ‘So be it’, comforted her with the word “ Don’t 
you fear; but Wind, Fire, myself and Varuna will shake 
you in the four parts of the Day and Night put together 
respectively in order to reveal the good and bad effects 
to the world.”’ 

aat ate 


wear aqaretaa frareisa far Prva 

LqaAAGNS ATA WAT AAT tt 

qa fare arasa enzaaisx go Tiwa | 

Ox: Ta a usae amare | aren: 

MRA Tae VArerralasewar: | 

mfiayar srerngesitrarayaen: uefa, 
qaTaMEaeel Aisa ATT | 
WETHAIASTAA SANT AMEN licil 
qMNSUHAD Aaa aaard wi: fey Araq | 
Reagaia Praca tarageatatal 7 191 
aqraey TERT Garegadiedaaistas | 
MATA AMSATTAT THB 112 SI 


Aéh. XXXII. Sl. 11-13] wrftrettseara: 273 


wrgratarlatiancetahiterrar: | 
Glered Trusagearaqgicracary 12 2 


Slokas 8-11.—The circle presided over by the Wind- 
God consists of the seven asterisms, viz., Uttara, Hasta, 
Chittra, Swati, Punarvasu, Mrigasiras and Aswini, (that 
is, whenever an earthquake occurs in any one of these 
‘stars, it has to be construed that it ig due to the Wind 
Circle). The following symptoms of this circle will be 
revealed a week in advance: the quarters are covered 
with smoke; a wind blows lashing with the dust of the 
earth and breaking trees; and the Sun does not cast 
bright rays. ‘During an earthquake of the Wind Circle 
the decay of crops, water, forest and herbs, the out- 
break of swellings, asthma, madness, fever, phlegmatic 
affections and trouble to the trading community will 
ensue. So also, concubines, warriors, physicians, women, 
poets, singers, traders, artisans, the Saurashtras, Kurus, 
Magadhas, Dasarnas and Mathsyas will suffer. 

ar a wat: | 

swash aquit Rrataesragrast: | 

AFA ERAT MATA, Ft 

AIPA ASM: TA. STTETT ATT | 

qaqa tea: wat aaeargy Nay Ta: 

quia weparcie eftenahe itera: | 

aeaseh Seq: ar_arteasaa: ui 


grantaararacehtsarsraaas Te | 
aTat rrawss BA Saeadark ude 
ATVB Ta AAA aaa TTT aierarey 


frwria BVA AA Wat WLM 
q. a 35 | | 


274 qeedigarary [Adh. XXXII. S1.14-17. 


ARATATTA TarITayA THAT | 
agra yersaaatters wegiay eet 
digita: saver: dleqed asaHIeETTaTaT: | 


THURSHIRKASE TAT AaB TT: ai 

Slokas 12-15,—Pushya, Krittika, Visakha, Bharani, 
Magha, Purvabhadra and Purvaphalguni belong to the 
' Fire’ Circle. This also reveals its symptoms a week 
in advance. They are the following: the sky is covered 
with the fall of stars and meteors; owing to the fire 
in the horizon, the sky appears to be illuminated; the 
fire with the aid of wind rages over the land. During an 
earthquake of the ‘ Fire Circle’, the clouds will be des. 
troyed; lakes and tanks will dry up; kings will be at 
loggerheads with one another; herpes, scab, fever, 
erysipelas and jaundice will prevail; men of great 
valour, hot-tempered persons, the Asmakas, Angas, Bah- 
leekas, Tanganas, Kalingas, Vangas, Dravidas and hill. 
men of various tribes will be affected. 


ant wi: | 

fralasl aqui raaratesragtast: | 

Gaaranrgenigtaranaayad: 

APUASAA se savonifa faathsa F | 

anisarrafieqruatd Sead aa: 

ABIEA: AAA: AArewaaea;Ty | 
aauseia fas: eeIMABAtzAa: II 


atitregamattemmarnaaiatert | L 
gquitwestazata ara warty 112 SU 
afearercniot weathers: | 
Tasiisgareterar Mreagaiea Tas Ta rETs lol 


Adh. XXXIL Sl. 18-21.] wfiretsvara: 276 


~ 
weg cqagomls werarafrrenrar ate | 
MAAABALATANTSSTHNT UCI 
HUAI RAP UMAGA | 
HATFUTMSAVNSTHUASTUV HY 1:23 
Slokas 16-19.—The asterisms Abhijit, Sravana, Dha- 
‘nishta, Rohini, Jyeshta, Ashadha and Anuradha apper- 
tain to the circle of Indra. The following is the token: 
the clouds resembling moving mountains, sending forth 
loud peals of thunder, containing flashes of lightning and 
appearing like buffaloes’ horn, swarm of bees and ser- 
pents, pour down rain. An earthquake of Indra’s Circle 
will ruin men of celebrated families and castes, famous 
persons, kings and heads of corporations. It produces 
dysentery, swelling of the neck, diseases in the face and 
violent vomitting. It will also bring trouble to the peo- 
ple of Kasi, Yugangdhara, the Pauravas, Kiratas, Kiras, 
Abhisaras, Halas, Madras, Arbudas, Saurashtrians and 
Malwas. But it will give desirable rain. 
aut TTT: 
fare a war qe seeraatayaar: | 
ena anaonfabrareitraraa: 
wuteqataa: Seat SANT FA YT | 
wifta qgay der sagatarcar 
 waedt agerg care figarivagaen: | 
aaiseta aera seq: aregarra: Il 
aera aareney eaTeTeaTis | 
PESIATIHAATAT Aaler TANT IR oil 
distaste agertren eget: | 


aiegarfaaker sregeatey wean zt 


276 | qeeaitarara (Adh. XXXII. Sh 22-23. 
a ee 


TTA NATANes aay | 
Tacategra Puateary ha Re 


Slokas 20-22.—The asterisms Revati, Purvashadha, 
Ardra, Aslesha, Moola, Uttarabhadra and Satabhishak 
constitute ‘‘ Varuna’s” circle whose symptoms are the 
following: huge clouds resembling blue lily, bees and 
collyrium in hue, rumbling softly, shining with streaks of 
lightning, send down slender lines of water resembling 
sharp sprouts. An earthquake of this circle will kill 
those that are dependent upon the seas and rivers ; it will 
yield excessive rain. People will forget their mutual 
hatred. It will ruin the Gonardas, the Chedis, Kukuras, 
Kiratas and the people of Videha. 

qat 4 Wi: 

fort vias art Mratateet agrast: | 

*enreargten yarledeed eect at ti 

Soi aren aH: wregy ada wey | 

aise aeqras areraaaiqar: it 

fayatagen ayvacytar: | 

AAAS AEN ST: ATTEN: 


qeferata: med reat ae a ana rata: | 
FATA GUA TYE ATA! (12H 


Sloka 23.—An earthquake shows its effect in six 
months, and a portentous thunder in two months. Other 
sages have included other portents also in the above 
circles. 

aw 4 TH: 

fagtaresragtern: Ravana: | 

Tar: wieqeregan qlegaet aay 


aftaiegert 4 geedant amt | 
atedia masa: HangaTeNTt 0 


Adh, XXXII. SI. 24-26.] guttaiseara: 277 


amt @ guliadienataraaia way 

MAAN Wager a Wargaraawrat a 
MAIARITAST ABW AATAANYAT: AAA Ml 
weed sored ana Rarer Gea Aa FI 
gaftanearaaetate Waeat deeeataaagy Ul 
qrstrqet ens Annes fara wrgraa: aii | 
teg Gansss aawarag Falaia eeats Aareay ti 
meget TAN qsares qe qd Henarliat a 
AAs WMS AS NA WA AAMT COGS WAHT ti 
The following threo slokas are from amadiear- 


Seat etary Tae PralaRETH RATE: | 
STN PR CGIE CURCICACCE CIUOUEC TIC mba] 


say aie Tage qaisauegionay a | 

aed aed qrqaed agi UAes WAS TVA ATM 
aecaaee: afaracer aa: water ihe aaa: | 
AeA AALAGA AAG AeMVSsts GS Parayz eet 


Slokas 24-26.—The other portents referred to above 
are enumerated here—meteors, aerial city, (Harischandra 
pura), dust, portentous thunder, earthquake, fires in the 
quarters, violent winds, solar and lunar eclipses, unnatu- 
ral phenomena in the case of any star or groups of stars, 
rain without clouds, any thing unnatural in the firmament, 
excessive rain, smoke without fire, flames without sparks, 
(?)} entry of wild creatures into a village, sight of a 
rainbow at nights —unnatural phenomena during twilights, 
fragmentary circles (halos) round the Sun or the Moon, 
contrary flows in rivers, sounds of:musical instruments | 
in the heavens. Any other phenomenon which is con- 
trary to nature and its effects should be included in the 
above circles. | 


278 geditararg [Adh. XXXII. SI. 27-29, 


Garga Says; persons in whose Nakshatras earthquakes and 
the like Utpatas occur will suffer miseries; they shall therefore 
perform expiatory ceremonies in honor of the particular Deva under 
whose influence the occurrences take place. 


gewaegl WAST ATYAUCIeRATHETN EAT | 
TOIT AAAAA BEIT: ll Voll 
Sloka 27.—An earthquake of Indra’s circle counter- 
acts one born of the Wind’s period (vide slokas 3-7 
supra) and vice! versa. Similarly the earthquakes of 
Varuna’s circle counteract one born of the Fire-period 
‘and vice versa. Thus, the earthquakes of particular 
periods and circies as stated above cancel each other. 
Garga says that if an earthquake is connected with two 
Nakshatras, division with respect to time of day takes precedence- 


AAALAC SATATCTAATNTTSS AN: | 
FAITH MTAsed TATA 1c 


Sloka 28.—During an earthquakej of the ‘ Fire’ 
circle and ‘ Wind’ period or vice versa (‘ Fire’ period 
and ’ wind’ circle), a celebrated king will die or suffer 
calamity; and the subjects will be troubled by the 
dread of famine, bygpestilence and drought. 


TRNAS: Brugyageeat Ste | 
masher Prgeteey ya 1128 
Sloka 29.—By an earthquake of ‘ Varuna’ circle 
and ‘ Indra’ period or vice versa, there will be plenty of 
food, prosperity, rain and contentment in the world, 
Cows will yield plentiful milk and kings will sink their 
differences, 
AQ BS SET: 
xented ea arrematiy asa | 
wreat graye git eiitraiquessaey 


Adh. XXXII. SI, 30-31, ] gni¥eitseara: 279 


azaitataaa aaa Farqeesasaa: | 

ahiqeaitiieg deat aa aed: 

Healer ay Aeravewasa7: | 

giaaaaagint aa ge: warear u 

Vageriaaunt aise Ana Weat aX Ateae vews- 

aqat | 

aseaRaaeara aia aaa zast wala | 

@ naatianaeera afeat fara cq 

SCMCTTUATIVISABOH A AUNT | 

aqrzaaa: ery; arMestary wala asary u 

MeTMSMaASsaaaanieaaanaly | 

MCI SAMIaBeaaaa: BRATATT: 

aaeaer: grea seursgiczararar: | 

wera aasqared syq: Tren u 

Qeqreasgalegry qaqiratearaaegeary | 

VAVAT: BIG ase uN ayy w 

afta: at: agarinata WaeuwAs7z | 

arama seareEed aQUATTT: Ul 

PBRANAALHIVYASTSATUA AAA: FU: | 

MNCUAA: SMITA FIM AFA T: Vs l—zra- 

qaaqdarataanacade FT aAlETg | 
TE HOA FT TH AT 7A HSSRITH URolt 

Sloka 80.—Where the time-limits for the happen- 
ings of the effects arising from certain omens have not 
been specified, they will be felt in the course of two 
months, if the omens arise in the ‘ wind’ circle; in three 
fort-nights, in the ‘ Fire’ circle ; in a week, in ° Indra’s’ 
circle ; and those of the ‘ Varuna’ circle on the same day. 


AAs Wat PISA WaAasl Taalaanesay | 
aeataaivdad sfeaatiseais @ ofa: sth 


280 wetaigarary [XX XII-32. XXXIII.1. 


Sleka 81.—An earthquake of the ‘Wind’ circle 
shakes the earth to an extent of 200 Yojanas; one of 
‘ Fire’ circle, 110 Yojanas; one of ‘ Varuna’s, 180 Yo- 
janas and one of ‘ Indra’s’, 160 Yojanas. 

AU Hryaq: 

qlasy ques faa aaarat wagag | 

quriveauaa cr qsqias way u 

wa aniagE Te Aves BST - gta 


Praqdaqated ara ca at faa a | 
afe aaa afin: sarrararaay wale ae 


Sloka 32.—lf there be another earthquake on the 
3rd, the 4th, or the 7th day, or at the end of a month, 
fortnight, or three fortnights, it will bring about the des- 
truction of prominent kings. 

waara agqdslg aaia arr aaa 

SAGARA SIT AA Ars. aay at n 

Sqaad Aa ay ay aew-aeAay ~ gia 


Thus ends the 82nd Adhyaya on “Signs of an Earthquake.” 


SRAIGFTT R311 Ulkas or Meteors. 
eitgagansat iat Sait ait aregear: | 
Aeqesraatga sae gaa Arm 21 

Sloka 1—The forms of those who fall down after 
having enjoyed unalloyed happiness in Heaven are called 
Ulkas or meteors which are divided into five kinds viz, 
faey-ignescent balls, 3est-meteors, a#af%-thunder-bolt., 
fawa-lightning and art-shooting stars. 

For a similar idea, Of. a7agte- ath ey ates fae. 
Garga opines that the meteors are burning missiles that are 


discharged by the protectors of the quarters for indicating good 
and bad effects. 


Adb. XXXII1. S1.2-4.] -saRanitsvara: 281 


AMT | Ti: 

reat Gaweas gargulaatea: | 
SHS Agra saat safsarht g¢ tt 
aaa weraigaraaaeEy 

REA BPRUS BHR AATA AAA YTS: | 
eatiaequagat atenitaa: amie 


STH TAT HS Tatgroaraiala: Tae | 
Raza: wethagare Aaraaly 12/1 
Sloka 2.—An Ulka and a Dhishnya cause their 
effects to be felt in a fortnight; thunderbolt, in three 
fortnights; and lightning and Tara in six days. 
amt a garaaigaray 
Seay WAST Mswgies adisaAaee | 
Mess gane atagqgoeaaa: wisssea 
HoUTHt are sega Teas Ia: | 


AT KSUTH KOSTA Aailaar Reva | 
Ro A COOP DCO ICEAICE MEL) 

Sloka 3.—The Tara meteor produces only a quarter 
of the effects: fixed ; the Dhishnya, a half of it} while the 
remaining three produce their full effects, _ 

HM Alay ACA TAMIATTTIAAATSTT | 
faqaia fqnacat atas ART ATAT 18. 

Sloka 4.—The, Asani or thunderbolt falls with a 

deafening sound upon men, elephants, horses, beasts, 


rocks, houses, trees and domestic animals, revolving like 
a discus and piercing the surface of the earth. re 


982 qeeditarary [Adh. XXXL Sl. 5-8, 


ATaMIN AaTedt Aazaal aear | 
gitsiaie Proaa aiteraaiag sasat lt 
Sloka 5.—The lightning which is crooked and ex- 
tensive falls all of a sudden on living-beings and heaps 
of fire-wood, setting them aglow, causing fright to the 
animals and producing a Tata-tata sound. 
aut a 


Fequzaensg sarsrAssEst Tata 


frog Hareqgesr g(t TI TaqaseaTsayayq | 
safeatwefasrat zt gett al TAT NGI 

Sloka 6.—The Dhishnya is a slender thing with a 

short tail; it resembles burning embers and is two cubits 


long ; but appears quite distinct over a space of forty 
cubits. 


aur a 
fycoar fear feeea wale aa ala sxe | 


aN ga lal Ys aAAsHaeTET aT | 
faanagray ar att Praeqerarg leit 
Sloka 7.—The Tara or shooting star is a cubit long, 


white or red, slender like the thread of lotus-stalk and 


moves across, up or down the sky, as if being dragged. 
aqat | 


ata g ewmatar qeqeaay: feaar fear are a 
sent fe fare Arad 799 caagsaT | 
alata vale ged Nar aed HaeTE: tcl 
Sloka 8—The Ulka or meteor is broad at the top, 


having a very tiny tail. As it falls down, it increases in 


dimensions. Its length is 33 cubits. There are several 
varieties of it. 


Adh. XXXIII. SI]. 9-10] waféasttseara: 283 
ge i aaa RC nT eT Rae 


aur a 
sepiad fearer aErHreT TStarar | 
VAASTATHTAAM HA SSTHSTAAT: | 
TINS ASIT WAT AT AT ATTTSHT Ut 
Sloka 9.—Those varieties of the above that resemble 
dead bodies, weapons, asses, camels, crocodiles, monkeys, 
boars, ploughs, wild deer, lizards, snakes and smoke, as 
well as those that have two heads, are of evil conse- 
quences. 
STAAUT HBAS TATA TCAISATAT: | 
aisqamagaaner: agian 12 ell 
Sloka 10.—Those that resemble banners, fishes, 
mountains, elephants, lotuses, the Moon, horses, molten 
silver, swans, Bilva trees, diamond (or thunderbolt), couch, 
and the Swastika design, tend to prosperity and abund- 
ance of food-grains. | 


aut FT BAT: 
ATATCTAAMNZATAY A Taeaay | 

squrdl GRAT TIal MA WaagZar ti 
fagaarasit dtar asqaedt azar | 
gevorisfaqear a stag a Taare ti 
aqie gor ar egar ar a frevar saiitar | 
saVayHITaat Fr eear Al TANT: 
qualmgiana emararaat war | 
dqedaat ala ataarra avert 
west qala etal qasdt ada g ar | 
STITT Farat | aEaeqaargar ti 
wywaaedl wgseawsia: | 

qaamt q wares feeftot at gq aeqar ii 
SAT ACATA TAAMTTATAT | 


sitgaragarelt at atest at frase y 


284 seedfeararg = [XX XIII. Sl. 11-15. 


Fe Ne TEE et 


statues deere ataenteheteetnemmeaanemanial 
‘ 


MATAR Prasat WAUTATATT | 
aaa ATA KaAATTATA SHA 122 
Sloka 11.—If they fall in buriches from the middle 
of the sky, they portend the ruin of the king and the 
country. Similarly, that which frequently whirls round 
in the sky, indicates unrest and distress among the people. 
aay Tegal ass a MYTH Fy | 
TAMIA ATT AA SAT Aaa Uk 
Sloka 12.—That which touches the Sun or the 
Moon or issues from either, accompanied by an _ earth- 


quake, causes an invasion by an enemy, danger to the 
king, famine, drought and fear. 


Gratagenasaaey areata: | 
IR PART Jrat araHwatarasar ata Wey 
Sloka 13.—An Ulka that moves to the left of the 
Sun and the Moon, destroys a king in town and one on 
march respectively ; whereas one which issuing from the 
Sun falls in front of a chief on march bestows victory 
on him. 
UB THI War Horn sient Bsnieatet | 
C 
PATA TYPUUTA Sar: 128i 
Sloka 144.—A white meteor ruins Brahmins; a red 
one, Kshatriyas ; a yellow one, Vaisyas and a black one, 
Sudras. The four castes are hurt severally if the meteor 
falls with its head, central part, side and tail foremost. 
satamigaiaa fongiaateat Sar | 
mel farqacet afatwat a ager ei 
Sloka 15,—A rough meteor that falls in the north, 
east, south and west bodes evil to the four castes severally, 


Adh. XXXIII. S]. 16-19 ] waftaatiseara: 285 


beginning with Brahmins; while the same being straight, 
glossy, unbroken and falling downwards from the sky in 
the several directions tends to the prosperity of the mem. 
bers of the four castes severally. 


SAAC ASIA SAVATAMAAA SAT | 
SEQUeAA AH TSA A TWIMAAAT 12SI 


Sloka 16.—One that is grey, rosy, blue, crimson, 
fiery, dark or ashy in colour, rough, visibleat a twilight 
or day-time, crooked and broken indicates threat of 
foreign invasion. 


aga zara Falger | 
Say wal tales Tatas ar Ill 
Sloka 17.—If one strikes a star or planet, the latter’s 
proteges (objects, countries and people) will be ruined. 
If it strikes the Sun and the Moon at Sunrise or Sunset, 
the destruction of the king staying in town and of the 
one on march respectively is assured. 
aal @ Biz: 
aaah cera agenrcreng tar: | 
ACTAAMAN SsSsat away F tl 
aur W aaraaigarary 
sqianey ordi fasisannania | 
nPa ceatardeaaelat @ arora i 


avaizamagysyeaedy gata | 
fararaaater gearitafeyeyg ec 
TAAFAG JUMATT Agredy Fey | 
fxg Sortgat ster avant a za ues 


Slokas 18-19,—if the main star of the asterisms, 
Purvaphalguni, Punarvasu, Dhanishta and Moola is 


286 —- Geeafearary [Adh. XX XIII. SI. 20-23. 


struck by a meteor, young ladies will be subjected to 
suffering: Similarly, if that of Pushya, Swati and 
Sravana be struck there will be trouble for Brahmini, 
and Kshatriyas. Kings will be troubled when Rohitti 
Uttaraphaleuni, Uttarabhadra, Uttarashadha, Mrigasiras, 
Chittra, Anuradha and Revati are struck; thieves, when 
Purvaphalguni, Purvashadha, Purvabhadra, Bharani, 
Magha, Ardra, Aslesha, Jyeshta and Moola are struck ; 
and artists and artistes, when Aswini, Pushya, Hasta, 
Abhijit, Krittika and Visakha are attacked. 


garaan: waar aaaarg UsIeATT | 

THAR ardtat Teg aeartat Fetq ue 

MUI Asttat WS HAarayyg | 

xs Oe ae 

Saal aeqitar aeHagiat Wieqeae 2 2it 

SIR gta quaaqaerais Taaatshrea: | 

Tara any faararaftat wy ue 

Slokas 20-22.—The meteors falling on the images of 

Gods bring about danger to the king and the country ; 
on Indra, to kings; on houses, to their owners’; striking 
the planets presiding over the several quarters (¢ at II-5), 
to the people of countries situated in those quarters; 
a threshing floor, to agriculturists; a holy tree, the res- 
pectable persons; one falling on the gate of a town, 
ruins the town; on the bolt of a door, the people; on 
the temple of Brahman, Brahmins; ‘and on mangers, their 
owners. 


KASIeHlsaaieaelaregpeaan water TAT | 


SVBAUTTAY AIT WHA APTA UR 
_ Sloka 23,—If at the time of a meteor falling are 
heard the sounds of roaring, clapping hands, instrumenta\ 


Adh. XXXII. S]. 24-28.) saféasitseara: 287 


music, songs and loud cries, the country and its ruler will 
come to grief. 


Vain fala Asqagi qeetala: at Taare | 
A MAT AATAT GAM Al Al Fara eaATATATSAT MUVVll 
Sloka 24.—A meteor which having the shape of 
a rod leaves its trail on the sky for a long time, betokens 
danger to the king. So does one that appears to be 


carried along the sky by a thread, or that has the appear- 
ance of Indra’s banner. 


Aa: vataa waa TRA | 

SeUMGSl TUT MAMTAVETTT Ll 

Teese BRa_ATaT | 

ataq TATA Aararsat 1.2E 

Rd Weal Gt SAI gUleaq | 

TITATT Mat UsaigHreat loi 

STSIRUIA eHiaRaioal | 

WSASTTM Wal ASAT AF UWIAT UR 

Slokas 25-28.—One that goes backwards destroys 

merchants ; crosswise, king’s wife; with its head down- 
wards, kings; head upwards, Brahmins; one that re- 
sembles the peacock’s tail brings about the extirpation of 
the people; one creeping like a snake, is disastrous to 
women; one falling in a circular form, destroys the 
town; in the form of an umbrella, the royal priest; in 
the form of a bamboo-cluster, is troublesome to the 
kingdom ; one that resembles snakes or boars and is 


accompanied by a wreath of sparks, or is shattered to 
pieces and attended with noise, proves sinful in effect. 


988 aqeateatara (XXXII, 29-30, XXXIV-1. 


arafearastaa usa vale viet Teary afd | 
qaaaal gies ara a aaa yen Afagar ar xslt 
Sloka 29.—A meteor that resembles the rainbow 
ruins the kingdom; one that disappears in the sky it- 
self, the clouds; one moving against the wind in a 
crooked way or backwards, is not auspicious. 


aaa aa gt as at aalt aa aa ca fara | 
faqala a wat at sign wala Raaaa waras ti 


Sloka 80.—A king has trouble in store from the 
direction wherefrom a meteor approaches his town or 
army; but if he marches to that direction in which a 
meteor falls blazing, he will ere long vanquish his foes. 

AU A SIZAY: 

qiaq situa dat waeqesr agrerar | 

at fast fuera fate faa wad Paar 0 

HAA ALBUSSSRACST AMISH AGATA TTR | 

at a waAleadigaray 

RUMEASTARN AUST NATTA: | 

dimousaniasihiatafr aaa lara 


Thus ends the 33rd Adhyaya on ‘ Ulkas or Meteors’, 


qhaqsaeara: 139!) Halos. 


aqkou wisi: fem: vata aera | 
AAA SAIMEATA Sars GAGs 1211 


Sloka I.—The rays of the Sun and the Moon formed 
into a circle by the wind and reflected in the sky with 
a few clouds, become halos with various colours and 
shapes, 


Adh. XXXIV. SI. 2-4.] saftaattsvara: 289 


FT THANG UAT ATA AITTNTTS: | 
STATIS MAMA TATA ITAAENAHATS UA 
Sloka 2.—They are crimson, blue. slightly white, 
dove-coloured, dark, variegated, green and white, when 


they are produced by Indra, Yama, Varuna,jNirriti, Vayu, 
Siva, Brahman and Agni respectively. 


The reading aitHat in the second line is preferred to AHA. 
TATE BUT AAHAAKATNAAT FeAey | 
TAA YEETIGS? AST TAHA? 3 

Sloka 8.—Kubera produces a halo whose colour is 
that of the peacock’s neck; others produce halos of 
mixed colours. One that is caused by Vayu disappears 
ever and anon and has trifling effects. 

aM FT BRAT: 

ahaaqatera taster: | 

waar aigania ara guava: u 

QPTAFACTARAASU: Vaasa: | 

CRUE AAA atasT: Asie seg: u 


TTAMIaA TS: AMSAT: | 
atiavre: fara: aitaa: Gagne vil 
Sloka 4,—A halo shining like the blue jay, peacock, 
silver, oil, milk and water in their order in the six seasons 
beginning with winter, being glossy and in an unbroken 
circle, conduces to welfare and plenty. 
aM A BRAT: 
fafat arate aad Anwar: | 
sie (HATEIA: MZVAtsaava: || 
mMeawagn: WA: wae: swear: | 
Card ASAIN: GS Bas: STA: 


290 eceaikargra (Adh. XXXIV. St. 4-8. 


aROTTATAT ABA FATA Sa 


AARSUREINATTMTHAY fat qITs |i 


Sloka 5,—Harmful is one which stays in the sky 
from morn till evening, shining with many a_ lustre, or 
like blood, and is rough, broken, fiaving the form of a 
cart, bow or triangle. 


fafansaasiaay agit gaara wa qa | 
atagiaa gereagepgara aie Nit 
Sloka 6.—When a halo resembles the peacock’s 
neck in colour, there will be excessive rain ; when it has a 
variegated colour,aking will be slain; when it is of 
smoke colour, there will be unsafety or fear ; and when it 
is of the colour of the Asoka flowers (red), or is of the 
rainbow, wars will rage. 
Adda Al TEs: fava: QuwRa: | 
adi aa af ailfa fae clare: ihe 
Sloka 7,—When a thick and glossy halo possesses 
the single colour fixed for the season and is strewn with 
little razor-like clouds, there will be rain on the same day; 
similarly, one that is yellow produces rain the same day, 
if the Sun shines fiercely. | 


alqantaqed: TSW areaiTA Rasher | 
aagwegenldedt at era Tae lic 


Sloka 8.—A huge and impure halo formed at dawn, 
noon or sunset, attended with the cries of the deer and 
birds facing the Sun, causes panic ; and if struck by light- 
ning, meteors and the like, it kills a king by weapons, 

aur a Ta: 

SqAMaaary Qalaequaigear: | 

qites: reeds aqrenadiqit 


Adh. XXXIV. SI. 9-11.] aafersttseara: 291 


staerantaiaets crater Tat | 
greater waa lI9 
Sloka 9.—The destruction of a king will come to 
pass, if every day the Sun and the Moon are blood-red, 
day and night; so also if they are encircled by halos 
continuously both at rising and setting. 
There is another reading wal@au:eaqi: which would mean 
“when they are rising, in midheaven and setting.’ 
aU S wi: 
fear qa qitat ett wR aq wat | 
waftadtedtaee az verte afta: i 
waa fafyar fret ame wtiasaa | 
RAyAtaare: Araya 
aut @ aaraataraa 
apeeacsaratta: Teaaitages: | 
aswnTagal wana = 1 
feaqo: weet ar aecaraagierat aes | 
TTA: TITRA Tea gika awa: 
Raat aggafstaceaisterarsarcatra: | 
Hagiwara waeqnadtssea wietar ari 


aaa TK faves aATTR TAT: | 
fargia TaRT ZaUTAT ANTI 12 ol 
Sloka I0—A halo consisting of two circles causes 
danger to the commander of an army, but little clash of 
arms. One consisting of more than two circles occasions 
clash of weapons, threat to the Yuvaraja and siege of town: 
aut & Tt: | 
fareemediae: SarnSerage: | 
Gx qaret Salaqea’d aeesieay: 1 
aikesrer arate final at ateqatray | 
ba Fane oe ee eee ee 
Rtersran arate asaya tgs eZ 


292 geeditarary,. (Adh. XXXIV, SI. 12-16. 


Sloka 11.—When a planet (from Mars onwards) and 
the Moon are encircled by haloes, 2. e¢. when a planet and 
a star are enclosed within the halo round the Moon, there 
will be rain within three days, or a warin a month. It 
is inauspicious toa king, if the lord of his Lagna or of the 
sign occupied by his natal star is enclosed within the halo. 

aM GT WT: 

afift aaragcawaera aeqat aE: | 

SAUN QtaeRAa AAIEl WAI WAZ I 


qhtaqaandl Wada: ATIEAATRE | 
waa 3 ataals ararassetaeea F eat 
Wa Fuwoiddeaat Arastwaaay | 
aia oagad gtieararaars star 18 3 
HeAMAWARMA GAT TOs | 

Ue atsatrauatgiet fa aTAT NRE 
ATATATTAUATAA Wad ad Hat 
gat mad Ta saaaqad 7 Nk4i 


Slokas 12-15,—Saturn inside a halo destroys base 
corn such as Priyangu, causes stormy rain and ruins trees 
and agriculturists. Mars inside it causes misery to boys 
(princes ?), commanders of armies and armies; he 
occasions danger from fire and weapons. Jupiter under 
the same circumstances engenders trouble to royal pre- 
ceptors, ministers and kings. Mercury bestows prosperity 
On Ministers, trees and writers and gives good rain. Venus 
is harmful to the marchers, Kshatriyas and queens, and 
makes food very costly. When Ketu is similarly situated, 
there will be danger from famine, fire, death, king and 
weapons, MRahu causes trouble to children in the womb, 
disease and danger to king. 


Adh. XXXIV. Sl. 16-18] safezatseara: 293 


aml @ qaraaiarany 
qaqytigarqagaRedter sy aia: | 
SATRAUSTS: Greaa gy ahaqiiaie: u 
Sat: Wester wet: cRaada Taras | 
qaguaqiaaet sarcaaia: maa: uv 


gaia fardtaectagnsacat gawaeai: | 
feaaga: aiyat at arqaieast Ary st Ue 


Mit Tay AeR: Aaragaea as Ta: | 
aealya fe sara warty avesag 1120011 


Slokas 16-17.—If there be two planets within the halo 
of the Sun or the Moon, one should predict wars ; if there 
be three planets, impending famine and drought ; if four, 
the king with his preceptors and ministers will die; and if 
five or more, know that something similar to the dissolution 
of the universe will be the result. 


UWI FAq Gata ayaa atexrayz | 
AAATTATaT Viz Rataleat aaa cit 


Slokas 18.—If a non-luminary or an asterism has 
got an independent halo around it, there will be the 
destruction of a king, provided there is no appearance of 
a Ketu at the time. 


TU A Biswq: 
aftaarsaeatn gr aa) afta | 
' gee vale fas tied garena 1 
 augeteaftar: gay stata: SEAT: : | 
era arenedta aerarorqarfy at | 
qftad aqr qeaeagr aera: | 
afy Sqqat + eageaq agzenes 


a4 qeeafterara — [Adh. XXXIV. 19-83 


fangratieqge wag marae Kay: | 
AWMigenaa wacaearqaard 128i 


qawsenerat qakar wise zqHe | 
QUA RRA ArAA AAA TATT (Ro! 
aafarediiet tRaviseahuarae sary | 
gag waqeat diet aasfards zeit 


Slokas 19-21.—On .the first four days of a lunar 
month, a halo destroys severally Brahmins, Kshatriyas, 
Vaisyas and Sudras ; 6n the 5th, 6th and 7th days, trade 
guild,town and royal treasury, respectively ; on the 8th 
day, Yuvaraja ; on the 9th, 10th and 11th, it is harmful 
to the king ; on the 12th, it causes a town to be besieged ; 
oh the 13th, mutiny in the army ; on the 14th, danger to 
the qtieen ; and on the 15th, to the king himself. 


aNTHIMTASaeataat AMVal A aware | 
ahtarasaten faecal 


~ ~ ~ 
Th FAA Sas vals sat TUTTATT | 
Rava: Vat gaa Vat ATT TAIT RA 
Slokas 22-23.—The line in the interior of a hata’ 
pertains to kings staying in town ; one in its exterior, to 
the marchers ; and the‘central one, to the allies coming 
tothe rescue. A line which is blood-red or dark and 
rough denotes defeat to those kings whom it represents, 
while that which is glossy, white and lustrous, indicates 
victory to those kings whose line it happens to be. 
_ Thus ends the Thirtyfourth Adbyaya on ‘Halos.’ 


Bnet ete 


Adh XXXV. SI. 1-3.) qaiitrsistata! 205 


SeAIFASAN AT MA4il Signs of Rainbows. 


aaa fier: vaaa Frasan ae: are | 
farala aqaear A TaaKeg ARETE: Uh 
Sloka 1.—The rays of the Sun which have various 
colours, being thrown back by the wind in a cloudy sky, 


are seen in the form of a bow which is called the 
Rainbow. 


Saag MARITAL | 
aaNaat TWTATAgaaTatag wala Ula 


Sloka 2.—Some sages declare that the rainbow is 
caused by the breath of the descendants of Anantha, the 
King of serpents. The rainbow appearing in front of 
kings starting on an expedition brings about their defeat. 

aU @ argaq: 

MAASSMA FZ GAA: SAS: | 

deat i: meazqalaeqag aaa Ul 


ataqaaime gitagq tard sa Araay | 
fevtaraaiq a WaMAeA: Ta=BIG F 13 


Sloka 38.—A rainbow which, being unbroken, bright 
and glossy, thick and multi-coloured, touches the ground 
at both ends, appears double and is behind persons, 
tonduces to weal and yields rain. 


Some interpret f@elza4qea as—of the two rainbows, if one 
isin the north and the other in the south, it is sfwarr é. e., 
contrary to each other, while, if they are in the same direotion, 
it is wala. But this interpretation in the light of Garga 
Seems to be wrong. 


O96 @eetearaig = [Adh. XXXV. Si. 4. 


aur @ KiNG aE 

Renafiited RavaAeqad aga | 

geet fase aigtea ved a a 0 

AW A aed BE 

agahafated feat Ramaaiiaa | 

gana ay sama fgaara ti 

aut a geeate: | 

ttearraatod fxan garg | 

Wa: THA sasequyadad u 

aU SF TANBAQUAAsS Tara | 

cat Rit ash wadiegagarg | 

qfaa a caraiai waea A aT: 1 

Aat age aga qallgerag dad | 

qin g waarat waa a aaa: 

aet see ama aac a gga: | 

wy: WeAaagey Was a aaa: 1 

Vet qTA AIA Fveargiaata ar | 

ag: Mqaaged ad Sat NTI 0 

qfaa gy feat art wactezagqaiz | 

aagqana Rand Sqaaaea¢rT u 

fuga fader wie of arqaar waa | 

aaa aetat faataaeas: 0 . 
Rigged gearhead scat aaa 
qreattaedia: aeritaepat ain: liv 

Sloka 4.—A rainbow that appears in an ‘intermediate 

direction destroys the lord of that particular region ; one 

seen in a cloudless sky causes pestilence and one that is 

pink, yellow and blue produces evils from war, fire and 

famine respectively. 


For the lords of the several! auarters, see Chapter LXXXVI— 


Adh. XXXV.S1.5-8.] —- Tafteeitseara 207 


HSAASATVT aaa faa sara: | 
ares werd ffs afrarara aageeny Itt 


Sloka 5.—A rainbow seen in the middle of water 
causes drought ; on land, destruction of crops ; on a tree, 
disease ; on an anthill, danger from weapons ; and at 
night, the death of a minister. 


as argent ae grat franaaerty | 
qa Fe Slemrasaray gli 


Sloka 6.—One'seen in the east when there is no rain 
produces rain and vice versa ; and in the west, it always 
indicates rain. 

Qt ada: Hea Haraaravearat Ry qadien | 
areaqacerad Mecareaarad aaHAeAT |] WI 

Sloka 7.—A rainbow seen at night in the east causes. 
ill-health to the king ; and in the south, west and north, 
it destroys the commander-in-chief, a leading person and 
a minister respectively. 

aU GT BAT: 

wget ado g.ldedt agaiferaz | 

aimarat ages siateqag: @zt V 

wat We weas qa aa qraadaa 

apaat weqeaa faaraaiaassia u 

qiaat rare aisarat aieaont va: | 

Rawatiaa: giralgogt Rit waa ui 

ages gftat a fra aang aad | 
fife geard Ravn saafs vist Raqaiong | 
wafa 3 Tat igiy aged aeafaged a Prageag lic 


Sloka 8.—At night, the rainbow in white, red, yellow 
and dark colours engenders suffering to Brahmins ‘and 


3965 | Geeafgatary [Adh. XXXVI. Si-1:3. 


other classes in their order. In whichever quarter it is 
observed, it will kill the chief monarch of that region 
erelong. 

Thus ends the 35th Adhyaya on ‘Signs of Rainbows.’ 


USTAANTSATISATT: RG! An Aerial City. 


wa 


sqantgitaqmanaqauaat ART | 
Racadiagen fd taraatars 8 


Sloka 1.—An aerial city seen in the four quarters 
beginning with the north is harmful to the royal priests, 
kings, commanders of armies and the Yuvaraja respecti- 
vely. Similarly, one with white, red, yellow or dark 
colour tends to the annihilation of the Brahmins, Kshatri- 
yas, Vaisyas or Sudras as the case may be. 


araiattaaaaage tage Praderar | 
airargrat ce sare TAA ATATT MAI 


Sloka 2.—An aerial city seen in the north confers 
victory on the kings defending towns; in the intermediate 
quarters, it is for the destruction of persons of mixed 
castes; and one with triumphal arches in a quarter not 
‘facing the Sun, for the victory of kings. 


aitaed aadad 3 aad aveRUETOTT | 
HTS FUSAT TIS ATAT 1AM 


Sioka 3.—One arising in all directions and at all 
times bodes ill to the kings and countries ; and one resem- 
bling smoke, fire and rainbow, destroys robbers and 


XXXVI, 4-5, XXXVIL. 1-2] verttatsvara: 299 


TETATACATATITPSTAT AMAT ATTY | 
aly ateqaeqalashtad wat Tet NVil 
Sloka 4.—One of faded colour occasions the fall of 
thunderbolts and storm; if it is in a blasted region (facing 
the Sun), a king will die ; if to the left, it produces menace 
of enemies; and if to the right, it confers victory. 
For @la, refer to Adhyaya LXXXVI-12, infra. 


TARIMISA V THI He THATATeTay | 
aal aa TTA Tergralt TH TITTT tll 

Sloka 5.—When a multi-coloured aerial city, taking 
various shapes, shines in the sky with streamers, banners 
and gateways, the Earth will drink in plenty the blood of 
elephants, human beings and horses in battle. | 

aut 4 Ssaq: | 

agat qarered aATaaTe TET | 

qe NaRTEt ATA SATIN tl 

Thus ends the 36th Adhyaya on ‘an aerial city.’ 


ea ETE 


ata TASANSINT ll 3911 Mock-Suns. 


strain: Tea RaaHearara: fara: | 
Yeitra: qos: Ye Aaatfirg eh 


Sloka 1.—A mock-Sun is auspicious, if it is glossy 
and possessing the colour appropriate for the Sun in the 
season (vide Adh. III—23 & 24supra.); if it possesses the 
lustre of beryl, is white or bright, it causes happiness and 
plenty. 


Set sat erreratage TeETTT | 
afraalont arat TETATETICN RY: 


“300 gerdfkarara, [XXXVII. 3. XXXVIIL. 
Sloka 2.—A yellow mock-Sun produces disease ; one 
of the colour of the Asoka.blossom (red) leads to the clash 
of weapons; and a row of mock-Suns tends to danger 
from robbers, to disease and destruction of kings. 
Raaga: afraal weageaiat Rrdishrage | 
SATS: aiswad sgh feceral TaET Uz 
Sloka 3.—When a mock-Sun appears to the north 
of the Sun, it gives rain; to the south, a strong wind; on 


both sides, danger from water; the same appearing above 
the Sun, destroys the king ; and below, the people. 


This sloka has already appeared in the 3rd Adhyaya as Sloka 37. 
In the morning for about three hours, when there are thin 
clouds near the Sun, there appears another Sun as it were, on 
account of the Sun’s rays (reflected in the clouds). This is called 
a mock-Sun. This may happen likewise in the evening also, 
aati A Breayq: 
ara qracat Sa eat gfeat za: | 
saa: qaaraifs aes ait aaa u 
GUT GW Geass 
Hanna: erent ar aevarg Sarescargila | 
wera yy werqdengtesr za frasaa afea: sat: 1 
aaah? aff aresver esata aren aftateronsy | 
aa aay: cys Sher tiaras ster MiaTEr: 4 
TAA yw: aTeagararataran: | 
werasted franfraedt wa oer alata: ae a 
Thus ends the 87th Adbyaya on ‘Mock-Suns.’ 


ed 


HSA URI Haze. 


This Adhyaya is reported to be not Varahamihira's, but an 
interpolation. 


Adh XXXVIIL SI, 1-5.]  weifiraitsvara: 301 


wate fiers tra gafahiaaatraa | 
afrreanratitqraa: aa Rasa: vet 
Sloka 1.—They say that a king will be slain when 
allthe quarters are screened by dust, resembling the 
mass of pitch darkness, so as to make the mountains, 
cities and trees indistinguishable, 


reat fee qasa: aR cae TTA aT FATT | 
MAeesa AAA GAT AT A Teaee Ul 


Sloka 2.—There will undoubtedly be danger within 


a week to that quarter wherein a mass of smoke appears 
at first or disappears. 


My wrgaly det areaearsaararat | 
a Prereratrarana veairaget Ts UR 


Sloka 3.—When the mass of the clouds of dust is 
white, there is suffering in store for ministers and subjects 
alike, and before long weapons will begin their work of 
destruction and peace will be restored with very great 
difficulty (after confusion has set in). 


alee yall ae Rate art ait | 
maaa wads vara Fracala uel 


Sloka 4.—Dust appearing prominently, covering, as 
it were, the sky completely at Sunrise fora day or two 
successively, augurs terrible disaster. 


HATTAMATE TAA AG TATATTITKT | 
yar aT Tot aera AVERITT WN 


Sloka 5.—Dust appearing in a mass throughout a 
night brings about the death of leading sovereigns, but 
bestows prosperity on other clever kings. 


302 qeeaigeraray [XXXVIII. 6-8, XXXIX. 1 


widtad faita ay Ue ied TET! 
TABATA TRAY aagery ligt 
Sloka 6.—When a thick cloud of dust spreads over a 
kingdom for two nights successively, it should be under- 
stood that the country will be the victim of foreign in- 
vasion, 


frvata wretiirrd qaenarcaqaraatatarea | 
Tat Vagal TAT Haq TaANTAT Wil 


Sloka 7.—If dust falls continuously for three or even 
four nights, food-grains and liquid-substances. will be 
destroyed ; and if for five nights, there will be mutiny in 
the forces of kings. 


Baga aa wt aaa daze | 
ANETTA HSAHSAEWTAATA? Cl 


' Sloka 8.—Dust augurs terrible danger only when it 
is independent of the rise of Ketus, etc. The sages declare 
that the effects will be fully realised only in seasons other 
than winter. 

Thus ends the 38th Adhyaya on ‘Haze.’ 


fralasaareata: 12311 Hurricane. 


Tit Taattad ATTA Tat aaTTATe | 
wate dat fraia: a a oat ctafterea: 120 
Sloka 4.—When a wind struck by another dashes 
against the earth from the sky, a portentous thunder is 
produced. It is harmful when it is attended by the harsh 
cries of birds facing the Sun. 


Adh. XXXIX, Sl. 2-5] —-gahterseerrfiattsvura: 303 


OU GW: 
Garratt AVA Alsat wrsatea: | 
qaaaq: @ faatal waatawasaa: 


aaigastatrg Taare aga: 
CTE CDR UCCTCCCUIPETAILE MES] 
MATERA TATtT Teas 
waaay VWs at Aat TU 
ae ald atarg awa aa fea wana | 
val Baiaaa Rarsaeary Fateals net 
an ~ bas 
awmatnegala Ateaanaaaay F | 
aramaeyasal ala aaa fear ea U4 
Slekas 2-5.—At Sunrise such a thunder destroys 
judges, kings, moneyed persons, warriors, women, traders 
and courtezans; in the first (watch of the day) period of 
three hours after Sunrise, goats, sheep, Sudras and citi- 
zens ; in the second watch, kings’ servants and Brahmins; 
in the third watch, merchants and clouds; in the fourth, 
thieves; at Sunset, iniquitous persons; in the first watch 
of the night, crops; in the second, groups of goblins; in 
the third, horses and elephants; and inthe fourth, mar- 
chers. The direction from which issues the sound, terrific 
and hollow (like that of a breaking pot), is destroyed. 
aU @ AMAaeaAaNy I 
fatasguan eta qaghazeuewas | 
aeeifaniareiqariga gaa aera i 
aur @ wi: 
aa Gaga set fafa: zat yale | 
aaa wrayedia Ttearise + Gag: | 
qe aut Seng gratia | 
TTS Edt Aaa aTUae | eae: i 


804 deedikerara [Adh. XL S$). 4-3. 


aWattian veatea seaata Raret | 

Ma TEU TAPATSTA F UTI i 

ufifrnt agate segs afta wa 

at fest witreeaa faldt ava: aa: 

areay era aia wasters 1s. 
Thus ends the 39th Adhyaya on ‘‘Hurricanes.” 


qasTMTaY l18oll Growth of Crops. 


derte nat eens 


Hteqgeeaarat ATATT Haver zz Ue 
Sloka 1.—On the authority of Sage Badarayana are 
stated the following Yogas, planetary configurations—both 
good and bad—for the growth of summer and autumnal 
crops at the time of the Sun’s entry into Vrischika and 
Vrishabha respectively. 


MAUSAD HeeAAePaqeisieds | 
qoae: ateaal frlza Rates: Veil 
Sloka 2.—If at the time of the Sun’s entry into 
Vrischika, the Kendras from him are occupied by benefics 
or he is aspected by (or conjoined with) strong benefics, 


summer crops will thrive splendidly. 
at B Wezwraq: 


qfasaet ad aiadietintiiee gika | 

Site Segtal treasracva Aaa 0 
smeRTTtTTASs Wawa sealaadiaaat: | 
faereaeratar feaaiicqarae 131 

Sloka 3.—When the Sun is posited in Vrischika, and 


Jupiter and the Moon in Kumbha and Simha, or vice 
verea, summer crops will prosper. 


Adh. XL. SI. 4-7] araritenswata: 305 


apiad Rate gasrat Faraea aT fetaae! 
SFATAAT ARIAT AAA JSEEAT ilvil 
Sloka 4.—When Venus or Mercury, or both, -are 
posited in the second house from the Sun (in Vrischika), 
or similarly in the 12th house, summer corn will grow 
well. If the Sun in addition be aspected by Jupiter, the 
growth will be splendid, 
aut A argwaq: 
qaiga gata ge ar quaza aa: | 
Reqiaeagq aie tt 


gaaeasteta aaigeatarl: AAT WI Arq | 
mea aaa ge Helse treaka: wet 


Sloka 5.—When Vrischika, wherein is posited the 
Sun, is surrounded on either side, 7. ¢., the 2nd and the 
12th, by benefics, 2. e., Mercury and Venus, and when 
the 7th house from the Sun is occupied by Jupiter and 
the Moon, there wiil be excellent growth of corn. When 
the Sun is posited in the initial part of Vrischika and 
Jupiter in the second house from it, the growth will be 
only half. 


maeragn: aicema Waegaaga: | 
aaa Wi aragq Hale ola vat wea Ait 
Sloka 6.—When Venus, the Moon and Mercury are 
posited in their order in the 11th, 4th and 2nd fromthe 
Sun in Vrischika, corn will thrive well. If in the above 
Yoga, Jupiter is posited in the 10th, the great prosperity of 
cattle also is assured, 
SrA TSt gat qissyga garaal awe | 


fasafartta aedl wag WaRATaTIAT 191 
qa 39 


306 qecaiearara, [Adh. XL S1. 8-106. 


Wloka 7,.—If at the time of the Sun’s entry into 
Vrischika, Jupiter be posited in Kumbha, the Moon in 
Vrishabha, Mars and Saturn in Makara, there is great 
prosperity of corn; but later, there will be danger from 
hostile invasion and disease. 


wey WwEa: Bas aa aaIUfSA: | 
OTs AAA Aa Std AarTals cit 
Sloka 8.—The Sun in Vrischika, being surrounded 
on both sides (2nd and 12th) by malefics, destroys crops. 


If there be a malefic in the 7th house from Vrischika, 
crops will be destroyed even though they grow well. 


AU A AWAWAT: 
Kueaer: qal guadend Marsaise aaa | 
Te Was WI: Gander Baraat 
qieara we aaa: TaATaTAT | 
ae feta waned Pounciamq USI 
Sloka 9.—A malefic in the 2nd house from Vrischika, 
being unaspected by benefics will destroy the crops grown 


first; but wlll enable those sown subsequently to bear 
fruit fully. 


TRA A BAA THT | 
Lyn as! 
AAAI Goa ASI FT ada lot 
Sloka 10.—Mars and Saturn posited in the 7th and 


another Kendra house from the Sun in Vrischika destroy 


¢rops; and if aspected by benefics, they do not de- 
stroy corn everywhere. 


aM & aaa: 
qaiaqudey: odiseq: Seana ated | 
Prancaege a am aia Be y 


Adh, XL. Sl. 11-14.] wearfentiseara: | 307 


afrndeacaig ATATENT Tet RT 
aaa dat fafa: weararatattenta: 8 ett 
Sloka 11.—When the two malefics occupy the 6th 
and the 7th houses from the Sun in Vrischika, there will 
be good growth of crops, but a fallin the price will take 
place. 


Afiaaaa Weasta Wea_eay | 
fara: aatat arara Brava at asses 12a 


Sloka 12.—According to the rule enunciated above, 
scholars should declare the (good growth or destruction) 
prosperity or adversity of the autumnal corn when the 
Sun enters Taurus. 

aU VW AaAwan: 

a Uq aitsiaeat Tamer fara | 

sasit @ area Paeadrar aardta: u-gta, 


Can Ly ~ 

Prey yuiky aa: aieagar awash a Razz | 

AA e ~ ~ ¢ 

Tansey Hed TAIAMANTIW | UL 

Sloka 13.—When the Sun, posited in Mesha, 

Vrishabha or Mithuna, is cojoined with or aspected by 
benefics (Mercury, Jupiter and Venus), summer corn will 
fetch good price, will be free from pests and be entirely 
useful. 


Note the other reading Z¥aaiTar*a -fit for this as well as the 
other world. 


BYRATITALT: INTTG assa ces | 
ARES TA Aadays wrerdiag len 
Sloka 14.—Similarly, the Sun posited in any one of 


the signs Dhanus, Makara and Kumbha and aspected by 
or conjoined with the benefics, makes the autumnal crops 


309 qeeafeaarg = [Adh. XLI. Sl. 1-3. 


LI A SER RETEST 


flourish and fetch fair price, etc. But at the time of har- 
vest, if the Sun be aspected by or conjoined with the two 
malefics, effects, quite contrary to the above should be 
understood to happen (i. €. the corn will be very costly, 
useless and infested with pest. But for sale, the period 
will be all right.) 


Thus ends the 40th Adhyaya on ‘Growth of Crops.’ 


zsalaqaiears? V2li Classification of Substances. 


a at xeaonalagaar cara: agen: | 
gatas Vargas qaqa: aay VU 
Sloka 1.—1 shall now expound, on the authority of 
the Sastras, the Rasis which have been stated by ancient 
sages for a knowledge of good and bad effects as _presid- 
ing over particular substinces or objects. 


THragatat FaAAISR ITA | 
WUSATATT Aa HARA F alfeat AW Uz 


Sloka 2,—Sign Mesha presides over cloths, sheep’s 
wool, clothes made of goats’ hair, lentils, wheat, resin, 
barley, herbs growing on land and gold. 

aU S erga: 

Se gqacleqesr adiqaransasreaar | 

DeAAG A MAT THs WIT ti 

qa TaZguatyamsaraeauMaaan a | 
fargasht qreagraagianareciat: (31 

Sloka 8.—Sign Vrishabha presides over cloths, 
flowers, wheat, rice, barley, buffaloes and bullocks; 
Mithuna over corn, autumnal creepers such as vines, bulbs 
of lilies and cotton. 


. Adh. XLI.SI. 4-6] THeaearitayrsvare: 309 


AUT BW BAT: 
a ufeatraerarsa: geqaswan: | 
fata AeaMNBBasy: BSITAATITT i 
BT RTTKTTA HSH TTT TAU | 
fae avaazan: faaetat as ATE VI 
Sloka 4.—Karkataka presides over paspalum, plan- 
tains, Durva grass, fruits, bulbs, fragrant leaves and 
cocoanuts: Simha over husk-grains, juices, skins of 
lions, etc. and jaggery. 
Ut @ BZTT: 
edz GBT ST: STAT TAM 1 
fae wea aavar: erdiat aet ger: 


qUSeaHAIM: SSUTTATA aga: | 
RAAT ATT VATA: TAITAT It 


Sloka 5.—Kanya presides over Atasi (common flax), 
Kalaya corn, horse-gram, wheat, green gram and legumi- 
nous seeds; Tula, over black gram, barley, wheat and 
mustard. 

AUT SY BAT: 

Brat FXAMACTHSA: ASS Tat: | 

qe y aaiqaara: fagrisrear ti 

qaqa: aaa siereasias aly | 
AAA FT TABINTTTA As aMeAyST NUN 

Sloka 6.—Vrischika presides over sugar-cane, what- 
ever grows being watered, such as fruits of creepers, iron 
or bell-metal, goats’ and sheep’s wool; Dhanus, over 
horses, salt, cloths, missiles, sesamum, corn and roots. 

Aut SQ BRT 

_ atefigra arias at aetaed | 

WES VB qe Tai FTAA 


310 geeaieararg = =[Adh, XLI. Sl. 7-10, 


AR TST AeATTTATH Usa | 
Sra aleaanoagacalaantr Safir (hol! 

Sloka 7,—Makara presides over trees, shrubs, what- 
ever grows through being watered, sugar-cane, gold and 
black metal, 2. ¢., iron; Kumbha, over water-products, 
fruits, flowers, gems and brilliant things. 

TU TA SAT: 

wR aadia a qaigewagsg | 

Sa Hqaraait sara sear 1 

Wa Harearaaeatearggasy terfty | 
MIA ABSA SATCATA AAA F Ilell 


Sloka 8.—Meena presides over such jewels as come 
from testaceous animals, e. g. from the pearl oyster, 
water-products, diamonds, various oils and fish-products, 

BUT ST BWIA: 

qugerasiatat reat att eat: tt 

UIAATAMT AAgaATIA ATA Sia! | 
MRCACAIATAT VUAT signe SI 
qzaaAT ailet als Dat Beis Beg | 
STAAALT HU DATs AIT TTHTHT oll 

Slokas 9-10,—Jupiter posited in the 4th, the 10th, 
the 2nd, the 11th, the 7th, the 9th or the 5th house from 
any Rasi causes the increase of the objects assigned there- 
to. So does Mercury, when posited in the 2nd, the 11th, the 
10th, the 5th or the 8th house therefrom. Venus posited 
inthe 6th or the 7th house from a Rasi destroys its 
objects while in the other houses, he promotes their growth, 
Malefics posited in the 3rd, the 6th, the 10th and the 
1jth houses from a Rasi prove beneficial, while in the 
rest, they are harmful. 


Adh. XLI SI. 11-13.]  qetenftatseara: 311 


eee eel 


qa FT HRA: 

APA GIA TaayRM Te: t 

awe Uaagarat gearnt shag: ea: 
Um: Waa at qiaggregseam 
Aslanzawnseag4e4wa: WA: Br: tl 
qUNRTAAVA BS BAA Alege | 


TITS HU: sereaTag aera afer | 
aeiteaxeant erdar Feat TULL 
Sloka 11.—If malefics in strength occupy the 
wqTaq houses (Ist, 2nd, 4th, 5th, 7th, 8th, 9th and 12th) 
with respect to a Rasi, the articles assigned to that Rasi 
will become very costly and scarce. 
aul A BT: 
UATAEAMTAT WIT TAS: rar: | 
ageatat alae Teaa aafea Fu 


gery Alea Asal AT Aalea Traltary | 
ageamnt ale: alaed aways FUT 
Sloka 12.—If there be strong benefics in the auspici- 


ous houses from a Rasi, the articles thereof will thrive, 
fetch good price and have great demand. 


aa A BIAT: 
quer Raat: ateat aear ay wie 
aafea aHalai 4 Zeamt Baa: ear: u 
airaetreraraty UiUMtems Yate gee | 
det aT HUG aa Bd rata: nea 
Sloka 13,—If a Rasi be aspected by strong benefics, 


there will be no harm done to its articles, even though the 
benefics are posited in unfavourable houses (i, 6., other 


$14 qeaigara, = [Adh. XLII. SI. 1-3, 


than those mentioned in Slokas 9 and 10). The aspect 
of malefics produces contrary results. 


Thus ends the 41st Adhyaya on ‘Classification of substances.’ 


ATHOS ATT? Vt) Fluctuation of Prices. 


araeyeniqrery tiara ateaqats | 
ep SATTTRTTTETHTATT qa a UH 


aU Aaa Ug RAae | 
AeApag geal FF Sqeraa TTY 2M! 


Slokas 1-2.—By observing excessive rain, meteor, 
rod halo, eclipse, mock-Sun and such other portents on 
the New-Moon and Full-Moon days and also at the Sun's 
entrance into a newsign, every month, one should fore- 
tell a change in the prices of articles. These phenomena 
on other days indicate kings’ sufferings through wars. 

AM A SIRI: 

eemiagened qaegr: Waa | 

saqatqat sea qarATaaa se 

far fadiqa siearary qs Qaugay 

afuagtagary aaisisa ata: 

stare (amag aaa maa aq | 

Mea Gl Wasa A ad Zrstaa: 


agenda ai wiqaqicae ame Hear | 
TATSROS TW AGUA Tsai 


_ Sloka 8.—At the time of the Sun’s entrance into 
Meaha and Vrishabha (observing the above portents), one 


Adh. XLII. SI. 4-8.] fraeatfeatrssara: 313 


should collect (buy) Summer corn, and forest roots and 
fruits respectively and by selling them in the fourth 
month, he would gain much profit. 


fayaey aaa] aeaa qT ARE ARTA | 
aS ara Age Fear negara be 
Sloka 4.—Should one collect all kinds of juice (liquids) 
and corn when the Sun is in Mithuna (with the above 


phenomena) and seJl them in the sixth month, he would 
make large profits. 


aah ayadeTTHaa TaTT | 
fag fgaiawna sisadiaite se: Wu 
Sloka 5.—Similarly should one store up honey, per- 
fumes, oils, ghee and sugarcane syrup, when the Sun is in 
Karkataka and sell them in the second month; he would 
make cent per cent profit; he would sustain loss if the 
selling time exceeds or falls short of that. 
fas qaiatraqsasain ans way | 
qaaaa SisawataiseTyT Sz: Ill 
Sloka 6.—If one stores up gold, gems, skins, armours, 
weapons, pearls and silver when the Sun is in Simha, and 
sell them in the 5th month, he will get profit and sustain 
loss otherwise. 
BA RAR BatawHcaanaat wat | 
“ NY A e f 
aS ata tea wraracala ata iho 
Sloka 7.—If one collects chowries, donkeys, camels 
and horses when the Sun is in Kanya and sells them in 
the sixth month, he will get an equal amount as profit. 


aiett wearavé attaraaravtaggana | 
Meagieaty F aiiaigairan afe: cll 


WT, q- 40 


314 geeaigarara [Adh, XLII. SI. 9-12. 


Sloka 8.—If one buys and keeps cotton cloths and 
the like, jewels, blankets, glass, yellow flowers and corm, 
- when the Sun is in Tula and sells them in six months, he’ 
will make 10U per cent profit. 


Teamaey aiaat HanreaqeraraTanel | 
3 o~ ~ ~ ° ° ~ 
TRIM ata YT la TST (IS! 
Sloka 9.—If fruits, bulbs, roots and varieties of 


gems are kept for two years, when the Sun is in Vrischika 
and then sold, they will fetch double their price. 


TWA TRAGTAIEANT Hala | 


THIRST Fa THgigzyTat Tied Noll 
Sloka 10.—When the Sun is in Dhanus, if one 
hoards saffron, conch shells, corals, glass and pearls, and 
then sells them in six months, one wil] get double the 
amount invested. 


aaa aan YRiagearsaeatiet | 
Perea ares Tara Hoare 18 i 
Sloka 11.—When the Sun is in Makara or Kumbha, 
one wishing for profit will do well to store up metallic 


vessels and grains and to sell them aftera month. He 
will then get double the amount invested. 


AAT ABTA YORS BeTAwSteatia | 
ART TATS TIABAT TAA 112 
Sloka 12.—If one collects roots, fruits, bulbs, vessels 
and gems when the Sun has entered Meena and disposes 


of them after six months, he will get as much profit as 
he desires at the beginning. 


Adh. XLII, Sl. 13-14.) fraeaftettseara: 315 


TaN Ta aay Braga: aaa at | 
THis Brat fees 1230) 

Sloka 13.~—The determination of profits mentioned 
above depends upon the factor, viz., the Sun or the Moon 
in the different signs, being conjoined with very friendly 
planets and aspected by planets who are very friendly. 

aut I Biyaq: 

ureait wait fra: al: at ar Revags: | 

MAGA AT AM BAZ: STA: i 


aaa: AFIT TI Wagaatera: 
rae: aaisya qaZat: eras | 
AYPAA Na? Aeeel al aeeayar wa: 
MaTEnay AA F_I TWeagacHs le vil 


Sloka 14—The Moon in conjunction with the Sun 
(New Moon) or in full disc and associated with and aspsct- 
ed by benefics promotes invariably the price of articles 
belonging to that particular Rasi occupied by her, Simi- 
larly, the un, conjoined with and aspected by malefics, 
destroys the price of the articles of that Rasi. Thus, 
should one make predictions—good or bad—regarding the 
price of materials, having duly understood the articles 
belonging to each of the signs. 


BUT Y BEIT: 
aaASMAIa Bsa: ager at faderat 
YAUTEMATa Aastar gear 
faaitaRraraat qrageat Piierat 
aaetatt steer fifiral avaay erat 


Thus ends the 42nd Adhyaya on ‘ Fluctuation of Prices. ’ 


316 qeeaigerara, [Adh. XLII. SIL. 1-5, 


FeVITATTT 18311 The Glory of Indra’s Banner- 


AM ATZAT ATI WH AW AGUA AAT | 

Maaaqqaaeat Wosway a*Taa lll 
Sloka 1——Thne Gods submitted to the Creator :— 
“Oh Lord, we are unable to withstand the Demons in 


battle. We, therefore, have come to you, the protector 
of the helpless.’’ 


SaGUT MATT AUT HAT F a: FIT | 
T ald F eg aT Gara a TAT UN 
Sloka 2.—The Lord spoke to the Gods thus :—“ Lord 
Narayana, reposing on the milky ocean, will grant youa 
banner, at the sight of which the Demons will not stand 
before you on the battlefield.” 


BSAA? AUS Weal F TET FU Fea | 
Aas RIqTaaMeargnadenq 13 
Alafaatacaaqad aa aa: aasteat aeaq | 
qmaanas Asqahaaaeayq uel 
A e oN ~ “ 
Hs AIT FT TaeGAT Tera zr Way | 
AAAQACT FFGHASAITTUTAST AT | 
Slokas 3-5.—The immortals with Indra at theirh ead, 
having received the boon from the Creator, repaired to 
the milky ocean and eulogized the lord, who has the 
mark of Srivatsa on his breast, which is brightene:1 by the 
rays of the Kaustubha gem, who is the consort of Goddess 
Lakshmi, who is incomprehensible, peerless, impartial, un- 


knowable to all beings, the greatest Being (Supreme Sou), 
without a beginning, all pervasive and whose end is 


Adh. XLIII. Sl, 6-8.] freeaféaitsvara: 317 


unknown. The Lord, being pleased with their invocations, 
vouchsafed to them a banner which would prove as the 
Moon and the Sun respectively to the lotus-like faces of 
the demonesses and the Goddesses. 
a Reguarmaacas TH fa arala Taha | 
n . Cal @ e ~ 
Saleqaay Geta GA SIT TAATT FAT WAS NI 
Sloka 6.—Indra was highly pleased on receiving the 
Banner, which was born of Vishnu’s power, mounted on 


a dazzling and gem-bedecked carriage of 8 wheels, and 
shining verily like the Sun in autumn. 


a faizoisentsaa ausrpeitentteaaa | 
agtaaaameeaaa ea Rare TAysRaeTT lst 

Sloka 7.—The Lord of Gods, viz., Indra, put the 
host of enemies to death in battle with the aid of the 
Banner, which was erected aloft, bedecked with groups of 
small bells, and which bore wreaths, umbrellas, bells and 
ornaments. 

aAt IX WT: | 

ACU LAH wer CATIA ATA | 

FAMeMTAAT War: TUYaT HTTT: U 

AAAAT TEMA Wa AAIISTUT | 

MAA ASIA RPCAN atsaear Ui 

a feat wat ah ata afga: vir. gfa 

saavaraat aaieat Atera TyAaTy | 
ats at a avg isaq aeqaaTANT ici! 

Stoka 8.—Once Indra gave a bamboo flagstaff to 
the King of Chedi, known as Uparichara Vasu--who 
could travel in the sky. The king worshipped that) in 
due form, 


See Mahabharata, Adiparva-64-Sl, 16-17, (Pandit Krishna. 
chrrya’s Edition). 


318 graitarara [Adh. XLII. S]. 9-12. 


eam 


oat wear ATA wet A TT: BitsaTea 
TAIGaraea Bia grat wires eit 
gen: sag wat watiaaaisat: TATA | 
ea Uy aiiareaia aaa Ata: Gs ATA Noll 
Slokas 9-10.—Being pleased with the worship, Indra 
spoke thus: ‘‘Those kings who act like Vasu will become 
prosperous with aJl kinds of wealth and will have their 
commands obeyed implicitly on earth. Their subjects also 
will be happy, free from danger and disease, and have 


plenty of food, The Banner will by itself show by signs — 
good and ‘bad—effects in the world.” 


{al Ga aeegaawgaaarara qaq | 
VRA AFH AAMT: TTS TT 2 2 
Sloka 11,—I am going to expound on the authority 
of the Sastras the method according to which the wor- 
ship of the Banner was performed in days of yore by 


kings, who wished for power, prosperity and victory at 
the behest of Indra. 


qe frat gaRnidtaaaraRsATA: | 
GAMA aEAT: BRAT U2 


Sloka 12.—The following is the method of making 
Indra’s Banner: An astrologer and a carpenter should go 
to the forest at an auspicious Karana, day, asterism and 
at a holy Muhurta (48 minutes), when there are good 
omens for the journey. 


For the several Karanas, vide Adhyaya O—Sl. 1—-2, infra. 
gyal: t 
far qamaatgug rere aiacirrxeaaet: 
g-qnategiagiaragurmadqahany 


Adh. XLIII. Sl. 13-16.] rueaniatiseara: 319. 


Vqiaitegerar: Gagarasiergane: | 
SAN SATS RU aaa aAseTSe UAT I 
wg: waza wufaadt ART gia | 
BEM FQ A (ANAVS Baeaegrigrar ii 
THMACAMSAATATAT AT BATAATATTS | 
oe o~ nA 
HAMA PPS HAS laeaqiHawlay 23M! 
TEATMBARMeIATASNSaaA F Aa: | 
Yq: SAKA AT TAs AMAA U2 
Slokas 13-14.,—The following trees are not com- 
mendable for making Indra’s Banner: Those that grow 
in pleasure gardens, temples, cemeteries, ant-hills, roads 
and sacrificial places; those that are very short, withered 
at the top, thorny, entwined by creepers, and parasitical 
plants ; those that contain numerous birds’ nests, hollows, 
those that are spoiled by wind and fire, and those that 
bear feminine names. 
Gat I Ta: | 
cigars slate vase qdat awz 
Tal Jat Wit aq: angarieqay tl 
¢ ~ bat 
wWBswasaan: Hanwaigray Ta | 
‘\ ‘\ e = 
CATARINA WAATIANIT Taq neil 
Sloka 15.—The best trees are Arjuna, Ajakarna, 
Priyaka, Dhava and Udumbara (Indian fig). Any one 
of these trees or some other of approved qualities can be 
made use of. 


Priyaka—Known in Tamil as #W-wuws i, 
Dhava-—Acacia Lencophloca, known in Tamilas QaerGawwsie 
Udumbara—The tree Ficus Glomerata. | 


Tretayaast arises wanay fra: Gy | 
* bat 4 ~ 6 
fiat aaa Tar CTE Harig weaTT URI 


320 qeedituara [Adh. XLII. Sl. 17-21. 


Sloka 16.—A Brahmin should approach in the first 
part of the night the-tree that has grown on white 
(red ?) or black soil on a lonely spot, worship it accord- 
ing to rules and recite the following hymn, touching the 
tree. 


wale rat yaa dea: alt aaiseg a: | 
Bret Wied Haat aaa: 1.21 
qigaat aad aie Asta anraaz | 
ITY tauTA Gad MayTATy uci 
Slokas 17-18.—‘‘Hail to all beings living in this tree! 
Salutation to you. May you change your abode after re- 
ceiving this gift. O great tree, hailto you! The king 


chooses you for the banner of the king of the Gods. 
Kindly accept this worship.”’ 


HSeMNaAaTa VYTHMSYaIT at Year | 
qeaisstgsal aes Rava ery Baz 18 
Sloka 19.—At dawn, facing the East or North, he 
(the carpenter) should cut the tree. A rough and creak- 


ing sound of the axe is not auspicious, but a soft and full 
one is favourable. 


TIAA AR WAT HAT A Ties | 
Wed wera Arlaaaeaacatay Nell 


Sloka 20.—If the tree falls down, unspoilt, unbroken 
and without being entangled in other trees, it ‘will yield 
victory to the king; one that falls down under contrary 
circumstances should be discarded. 


feral aaIASA Ys ae rae | 
BHU KAN Tees TAGE IAT 1182 It 


Adhy XIII, Sl, 22-24.) Prweaiitetrseara: 321 


Sloka 21:—The tree: must be chopped at the top to 
the extent of four inches, and at the bottom, of eight 
inches, and then the trunk must be put into water. After 
taking it out, it must be taken to the town-gate through 
cart or by men. 


AUAF AAT ATA ATA ABN Azar | 
~ Ow N CA 
AAAAUNSAAS TAUB FI Tghea: il 
Sloka 22,—Ii the spoke of the cart-wheel give way 

when the tree-trunk is being carried, the king’s army will 
be shattered ; if the rim breaks, the army will be des- 
troyed; if it is the axle, the king will lose his wealth ; and 
if the axle-pins give way, the carpenter will come to 
grief, 

AKITYHISCASEA AAA TAT | 

‘qaqaaaaaraige: QaTde 12311 


© e AA 


qearearaaiat ae eee RY ara: | 
MATA MAIIFTIT UWII 
Slokas 23-24,—QOn the eighth day of the bright half 

of the month of Bhadrapada, the King in the company of 
the citizens, the royal astrologer, ministers, chamberlains 
and prominent Brahmins, all dressed in auspicious gar- 
ments should cause the Standard of Indra, covered with 
anew cloth and honoured with wreaths, perfumes and 
incense, to be ushered into the town by the citizens to 
the accompaniment of the sounds of conchs and musical 
instruments, 


AUT S wa: | 


. sileatz: frarezat SHOT Wega | 
af Geeedt. ast ant asteade 1. 
a. d- 41 


322 gusdieecua [Adh. XLII. Si. 25-30, 


VUTIATHAVTAAMSIVET WATT | 


é 
FTC ED ACLU CIC OIC IU c MIR 
AAANMTE NTAGTNTA TAT | 
ACATHUIATRT ATT TAT 2AM 

Slokas 25-26,—The town into which the standard 
is taken should be adorned with beautiful flags, triumphal 
arches and leafy wreaths, have the people jolly and 
happy, the thoroughfares cleansed, sanctified, and filled 
with gaily: dressed courtezans, possess shops sanctified, 
be resounding with the noise of the chantings of Punyaha 
hymns, and possess junctions of roads filled with actors, 
dancers and songsters. 


qa Tatar: Tar wafer fawara erarar: Tat: | 
TAT FTCA VHT TATHTT Nl 
Sloka 27.—Flags hoisted in the town, if white, lead 
to victory; if yellow, to disease; if mixed in colour, to 
success ; and if red, to the raging of swords. 
ae waaaedi fraraaedl wars aaa: | 
TSA AIST ARIA? AMIS AT NI 
Sloka 28.—If the tree trunk, while entering the 
town, is felled down by elephants or other animals, 
there is danger impending ;_ and if boys clap their hands, 
or if animals fight each other, there will be war. 
araea gama faa atirages | 
MARA ATATs:- SAAT 112311 
Rrarqafiqar: gigas BRITT | 
Ber aha atacatt Pras aetargq. 31 
Slokas 29-30.—Then the carpenter should plane 
the trunk and mount it on a platform, so that itis held 


Adh. XLIII. Sl. 31.] — Reweanffsitsvara: 323 


Ae ceeeey 


horizontally on it. Onthe eleventh day of the month, 
the king should cause vigil to be observed at night. The 
royal priest dressed in white cloths and wearing white 
turban should offer oblations to the Fire with hymns 
addressed to Indra and Vishnu, and the astrologer 
should observe the symptoms of the fire. 


rexsareit: guia: fasat qatsaaistaeatz | 
VASTAUSHA sis Barat MMAsHTeas 1.321 


Sloka 31.—If the fire be fragrant, glossy, thick, full 
of flames and have the shape of auspicious things (such 
as umbrella), it will be beneficial; if it be otherwise, it 
will be inauspicious. This subject has been dealt with 
by me in detail in the Yatra (work entitled Yoga-Yatra). 


I G Wargrarary | 


wasit wasit ger: Sargalaswsyayar Tara: | 
we Zarrdthetsinge kawarsevasiaqs: 
fafafaaraia areq giaga qrrg:ata: Birsiszar | 
uetiasageieaia: Ten Aaeiste etisas: I 
WIBCASAATFRTA CAATSAAITACTS TTT | 
TAVITA AMTAT FAYUACKS: CHSFHT Ul 
aaieqreagqerinarg astweTeaeay ar | 

wesin Giitaaaig qasad Rrara gara: 
eereegiqawa: aeasH_Gayt ACtTa: | 
MEMANATLTBAgIIseT TITAACSTAS It 
SUNY Mayers: wera wfe- 

a2 Regeneaata: Ravat very Gea: | 
fra: quit: epfewiied aargetat qz- 
ABrqracemagiaan ager sais ni 
KUNCaaTraTEqITTENT SITS 
Wietatggdtenwatiaeh: yw: 1. 


324 geeaigarara [Adh. XLIII. Sl. 32-36. 


ae: Miwraqda gage: feared aarater: 
asus Taseaaya: WIA Sie ui 
meaataaaa aagssiaits: 
fara: sqtanira Fay FT | 
WHITRANTS at 
aat agawaat tant Bus va 
Sloka 32.—If the fire at the time of Purnahuti, +. e., 
final oblation, blazes forth of its own accord, is glossy 
and has its flames turning to the right, the king will 
bring under his sway the whole earth with the girdle of 
the oceans and the beautiful pearl-necklaces of the 
waters of the Ganges and the Jumna. 
AUARUDHHUOLHSAATIMSATAM AAT | 
Lae! * ~~ o 
qT MUAAAATASTBIA BUA Meatyed FTA NRW 
Sloka 33.—When the fire shows thahue of gold, 
Asoka flower, Kuranta blossom, lotus, beryl or blue lily, 
darkness will find no place inside the King’s palace, as 
it will be dispelled by the rays of the gems. (Such a 
fire is auspicious and will confer on the King gems and 
other riches). 
tat wretatactaat anaaisitaate aft gees | 
a \ vant ~ A 
at aareauqcagiza wate ara fafadioa Ra: Ul 
Sloka 34.—Those kings whose sacrificial fire emits 
sound similar to that of a group of chariots, oceans, 
clouds, elephants or drums, will in their march darken 
the quarters, being thronged with herds of intoxicated 
elephants. _ 
AASTAAATTTUATS? TINT WHAT | 
STAM AHF TTT ATT. FAT 34 


Adh. XLIIL SI. 36-38] fteaearftattseara: 325 


Sloka 35.—If the fire resembles a banner, pot, 
horse, clephant or mountain, the Kings (whose sacrificial 
fire is referred to here) will bring under their control the 
earth having the rising and setting mountains for her 
lips and the Him-ulayas and Vindhya for her bosums. 


Note the alliteration and imayery here, 
PAAAAAATASIAITINTAL F RATA AAs | 
AMATTAMUAT TATA AT TAGIT YATS 11340 

Sloka 86.—If the fire has the smell of elephant’s 
ichor, mud, a lotus, fried vrains, ghee or honey, the King 
will have the earth in front carpeted, as it were, with the 
rays issuing from the crown-jewels of prostrate poten- 
tates. 

a ah — 
SH AZiaBid AHH DADA APariaer: | 
AMAIA TU ea Aaa HS eANT FaeTaTTT UII 

Sloka 37.—These good or bad omens observed 
from the features of the sacrificial fire on the occasion of 
raising Indra’s Banner should be taken into consideration 
also at the time of a birth, sacrifice, propitiatory cere- 


monies for the planets, marching or journeys and 
marriage. 


TSTTIUTATAAMAavasy HTN | 
AIT AITTUNQCACASETT FT MAN NAcIi 
Sloka 88.—QOn the 12th lunar day synchronous with 
the asterism of Sravana or without it, the Banner should 
be raised, after honouring the Brahmins with jaggory, 
sweet-meats, a sweet drink prepared with milk and such 
other things as well as with Dakshinas (gifts of money), 
AM SA TT I 
AA AANA STMT TATA | 
gigeat fat aaged a Ratswar u 


$26 geedfkarara (Adh. XLIEI. Sl. 39.42. 


TRHATA: BAN: ME AA? TH TT AT TSA? | 
ba’ ¢ \ 
AAMAETASY UA ETM (13S 
HETAMFAT AIAAY F TAFqT Aq | 
ALA ARAMA TeAssiya Waranq volt 
Slokas 39-40.—Manu nas laid down that five or 
seven minor Standards should be made under th: name 
of ‘Daughters of Indra’ by skilled artisans. Of these 
two called Nandee and Upanandee measure _ respectively 
three-fourths and a half of the height of the main Banner. 
Four others viz., Jaya, Vijaya andtwo Vasundharas are 
taller (than Nandee) by a sixteenth. In the middle, 
there is one called, ‘ Indra’s mother’ which is taller than 
the previous by an eighth. 
aut Smt: | 
CTSSHA: TA AT Al Sanezar: | 
gras Wars Far: Hea (a: 
MeaNST TWeTeaMT TATSTT | 
AverqaRsaa: aitga ita: wa: Nl 
qwanagaia ar ae we Reaatitaay | 
SANIT YR AASAT YU 
fia: gaia gealiy ge roi ead | 
ala way cera ana ATEN Nez 


Sloka 41.—The ornaments of varied colours that 
were put on the celestial Banner by the Gods who were 
delighted in days of yore should be given in their order 


to this Banner also. 
THITRAHT TAS Rasher sey | 
TIM SIE FET GaSe TT HER 


Addn, XLILL S1. 43-49.] Qreeatitattseata: 407 


wath aise qalategy yar say | 
aftd aaadd aarn siieaazaesq Weal 
APaA TT: Tia AIA TataAT | 
wy Ry W Tgsecalsq vl 

ras B RTC TATATTTEATT aghray | 
ACAAAVSTUGBIASA TSTYNTAZ V4 
aqdacaweg aad Was T1a-4q | 
CAAA TAA ALLA TATA ell 
apaugel Adta: aiTTK TT | 


“ 


aay a faagaa alsqeraag live 
fetacancitaiiagatt Rare TaeaT Hat: | 
eis zecqitam seaward ea: vis 


o~ FFL 


area RoR iad eat | 
Taaeaea Agasd Rafa wedi 
Slokas 42.49.—The first ornament of the hye of 
the red Asoka flower and of quadrangular shape was 
given by Viswakarman (the celestial architect); Brahman 
and Siva gave severally a girdle of many colours. The 
third ornament, octangular and bluish-red, was given by 
Indra. Yama conferred the fourth gift, viz., a dark and 
lustrous #@ts (name of an ornament on Indra’s Banner), 
Varuna gave the fifth ornament, a sexangular and madder- 
hued one, resembling the waves of water. Vayu bestowed 
the sixth gift, vtz., an armlet, made of peacock feathers 
and as dark as cloud. Lord Subrahmanya gave the 
Banner his own multi-coloured armlet as the seventh, 
The God of fire gave the eighth, a circular ornament 
reaembling the flame of Fire. Indra gave another ornas 
ment, ve, the ninth, a necklace looking like beryl, 


$28 euifeararn [Adh. XLII, $1.-50:45, 


One of the Sun-Gods, by name Twashta, gave a lustrous 
ornament, looking like the wheel of a chariot, as the 
tenth. The Viswedevas gave the eleventh ornament 
called Udvamsa, resembling a lotus. The sages bestowed 
the twelfth gift named Nivesa bearing the lustre of blue 
lily. Jupiter and Venus adorned the head of the Banner 
with the thirteenth ornament slightly bent at the two 
ends (or endowed with short bottom and top), broad at 
the upper end and shining like molten red lac. What- 
ever ornaments were created by the Gods severally for 
the sake of the Banner, are to be understood by the 
wise as being presided over by the respective deities. 


RIAU: Was sane vata (ize | 
GA ATA AVAeTaIetAVelalts 14 oll 


Sloka 50.—The first ornament has a circumference 


which is a third of that of the Banner itself; and each 
succeeding one should be smaller than the preceding one 
by an eighth, 

Saas Tad WotersrTE gag | 

ATA WIAA Waray wistaa: lle 

Sloka 51.—One in the know of the science germane 

to Indra’s Banner should equip it with ornaments on the 
fourth day thereafter, 7. e., on the 15th lunar day and 


recite devoutly the lswn hymns sung by Manu 
according to the Sastras. 


URAATTRA ATA TATA A | 
eae: aRacadt: gaiuemcaezea TS 
Fal AAIEMASSG: aaaceaauecit: | 


Aah, XLII. SI. 54-57.] Areentteitseara: 390° 


ARCA YST THREAT (eyawts: Fear geeTws | 
HAH ATL GA: ACAI Taaeger evil 
aa aes mienteg aa raz | 

Sala WK aaay AaNqearn Ae TAT Baeq Nell 


Slokas 52-55.—‘' Accept with a gladdened heart these 
auspicious ornaments on the occasion of this Sacri- 
fice in the same manner as you did, being honoured with 
excellent gifts of brilliant forms, by Siva, the Sun-God, 
Yama, Indra, the Moon, Kubera, the Fire God, Varuna, 
multitudes of great sages, the deities presiding over the 
quarters, nymphs, Venus, Jupiter, Skanda and the hosts. 
of Maruts (winds or Gods), You are without birth, 
imperishable, eternal, of immutable form, all-pervading , 
the great Boar, ancient being, the God of Death, the 
destroyer of all things, fire, thousand-headed, Indra and 
adorable. I invoke the seven-tongued seer; viz., Fire, 
who is the protector; [ invoke the mighty Indra, the 
ruler of the Gods, the destroyer of Vritra and leader of 
a mighty army, who protects us carefully. May our 
heroes be crowned with success. ”’ 


AT Besa sy Aa Tat areas Hawt 

Taare: ATAUAT AEA JAA JVETS aT: N44 
Sloka 56.-The King observing fast should recite 

the above auspicious hynins in front of the Banner, when 


it is decorated, erected, brought into the town,’ bathed, 
decked with garlands and when it 1s removed. 


ST MAMITSIETAAMOETAgeet | 
aeqahia: Nzanaawges Re FT slSUs: Loli 


330° ; aeaftarsia, (Adh. XLII. SI.-58-60." 


ASAT COMGaTs BPoraeaisiede4ng | 
BUITAHEA ASAT As aMAgavaleaqq (4c! 
Slokas 57-58.—The Standard which is bedecked 
with umbrellas, flags, mirrors, fruits, crescents, multi- 
coloured garlands, plantain trees, sugar canes, figures of 
snakes and lions, ornaments, windows and the images of 
the protectors of the quarters in their respective regions 
should be raised being fastened with strong ropes and 
hard wooden props on both sides, along with the minor 
standards called ‘ Indra’s dauyhters’’ made of strong and 
unbroken wood: The arch at the bottom must be 
fastened with tight nails. 


MAAITATA ARSTALATTA: 
& S50 
TSizaaeH: BRATS | 
e ICICRC ETC ARICKARE EEE 
TAMAIsS RATATAT 13 
Sloka 59.—The King should raise the banner to the 
accompaniment of the unceasing shouts of crowds 
drowning all inauspicious sounds through the auspicious 
benedictions and invocations, the loud sounds of drums, 
tabors, conchs, kettle-drums, etc., and through the -re. 
peated chantings of Vedic hymns by Brahmins. 


RUS LAST ATY TATE 
aaa ifaatheaerger Fiz | 
qaaiaaqas: Fania: TATA 
WRaAAATT BARTTATT 11§ oll 


Sloka 60.- For the destruction of the enemy, the 
King should cause the banner to be erected in such a 
manner as to point to the city of the enemy with its tip— 


Adh. XLII. Sl. 61-64.) Rraenfésitseara: 331 


the banner being surrounded by the citizens who bew 
their heads in homage and who invoke it with fruits, 
curd, ghee, fried grains, honey and flowers in their 


hands 
aad a a AaitaaTHe- 
TAMAS F | 
SEYTAACHTY ACA SeTAT AIl- 
AHA TAaTa PTET: 118 Vii 
Sloka 61.—The raising of the Banner is auspicious 
when it is neither too slow, nor too fast, not shaky, and 
when its garlands, decorations and ornaments are not 


spoiled. If otherwise, it forebodes evil; and the royal 
preceptor should mitigate it through expiatory ceremonies, 


aN A WT: | 

HAC AAAL ART ITCH TETTA | 
FUTIATM A AAAMASTCHA 
faatatesragi ara aia waaiarn: | 
SeGTAIT A at aaa: VTA g 


HONTHARKUNTHAHHS? 
Saleadegaita wa qa | 
aan ait qausaa aciea 
Sal frairaaaa fraay BNA 142M 
STANT FIagaERteay Bilt fasayq | 
afta aray gafkagent dae aedaaitay 11881 
Uagiivary waar carat acteree eae qa | 
WeaTATSY FT RAH fees aeaytansaeg dy 
qAtra Maas TAT FT Ael 
STISA aTada AAFATATTAM: | 


839 : geedfgarara [Adh, XLIII. Sl. 65-66. 


Talia ete anaemia tate eoneeen eee 


HTT T A I HAT fear 
AK DaeqHag Bia Fara: We 4il 
TMAH STA TTS UT Ala: Tiss ATTRA: | 


ATHFITS HTT A TTA ANA FT eS] at li&&il 
Slokas 62-66.—The wise declare that there is great 
danger in store for the King if a carcass-eatiny bird, owl, 
dove,, crow or vulture sits on the Banner. Ifit be a blue 
jay, the danger is for the Yuvaraja; an eagle sitting on 
it, will deprive the King of his eyes. The King will die 
if the umbrella on the banner breaks or falls down If 
honey-bees cling to it, there will be dagger from thieves ; 
a meteor faJling on it augurs the preceptor’s death; a 
lightning, that of the queen. The fall of a flag denotes 
the queen’s death, while that of an ornament augurs 
drought. Ifthe staff should break in the middle, top 
and bottom, the ministcrs, the King and the citizens _ will 
respectively meet with their end. When the staff is 
covered with smoke, there is danger from fire; when 
with darkness, mental aberration will be the result. The 
ministers will be destroyed if the figures of the snakes 
fall or break. If portents are observed in the north and 
other quarters, Brahmins and other castes will suffer. If 
any of the staffs called ‘Indra’s daughters’ break, 
courtezans will die If the ropes should give way, 
children will suffer. If the prop at the bottom breaks, 
ity indicates trouble to the King’s mother.” Whatever 
good or bad is done by boys or actors will have corres- 
ponding effects. 

aut a at: | 
Agenta: at witag ar ats 
Ta Ada Ta Rraalitgegng t 


ALIII. 67-68, XLIV. 1.] aqararfistssara: 333 


wa He: Hea HeTIT a | 
ghiardte star aenia wa azn ef 
feraqesgtaaatad aatagsa aaisely qeqt | 
THe ae BEN FadIiRahe: BSA Goll 
Sloka 67.-—After worshipping the erected Banner of 
Indra for four days, the King should cause it to be re- 
moved on the 5th day in the presence of his ministers 
for the prosperity of his army. 
sVivaagaaldd slahicaqaead Haq | | 
fafaraaaga-a aia a gad aaaragaeta lect 
Sloka 68.—If a king observes this vow established 
by Uparichandra Vasu and followed by other kings, 
without any break, he will not have any trouble from 
his enemies. 


Thus ends the 43rd Adhyaya on ‘The Glory of -Indra'’s Banner.’ 


SPENT EE enone 


atustafava: Weel Lustration Ceremony. 


MAMAS THATIEATUSTAIT FASATA | 
sedleafa atwqaekaciasd gal 21 
Sloka 1.—When Lord Narayana opens his eyes, 
vtz., the Moon and the Sun with the eye-lashes, vie., 
clouds (i.*e.., when he wakes up from his Yogic sleep in 
autumn), lustration should be performed for horses, 
elephants and men (warriors). 
. Lustration of armsis a military and religious ceremony held 
by kings on the 19th of Aswayuja before taking the field, 


God Vishnu rises from sleep on the llth lunar day of the 
bright half of Kartika, 


334 geeaivarara (Adh. XLIV. Sl. 2-6. 


giasaaaral aifinasa qwacsat ar | 


MAGA a galasaasadi aay Wai 


Sloka 2.—The expiatory ceremony called lustration 
should be performed on the 8th, the 12th, or the 15th 
day of the bright half of Kartika or Aswayuja. 

4 CALA 
ATUAMAT WIAA TaMeTT | 
eqeaisard catge ateot Bray 131 

Sloka 8.—To the north-east of the town on an 

auspicious spot, there should be erected a triumphal arch 


of excellent timber, sixteen cubits in height and ten in 
extent: 


AAATMGHHANT DileqTT FITITTT | 
auatalhanea saa aes ast Vit 
Sloka 4.—It is also necessary to have a holy house 
(where the expiatory ceremony will take place), made of 
the branches of Sarja (Sala), Udumbara—Indian Fig 
tree—or the Kakubha tree fully strewn with Darbha grass 


and equipped with a door,adorned with fishes, flags and 
discuses made of bamboo. 


gaara aiaint agianasagtagiar | 
way fgedtargerd aieage mong: iti 
Sloka 5.—With a string dipped in saffron paste : 
Bhallataka nuts, rice, costus and white mustard seeds 
should be tied to the necks of the horses brgught into 
the holy house for the sake of their prosperity. 
Sal & sZag: 
wiswapaaaig SE wyas aur | 
MANY SS wedges are wmieagsray vy 


VaTVMAATTTTATECATM TREN: 
ame mae galsoita atHTTA NSU. 


Adh. XLIV. SI..7-9]  ‘aqaearfésiseata: 335- 


Sloka 6.— With the hymns addressed to the Sun 
God, Varuna, Visvedevas, Brahman, Indra and Vishnu, 
an expiatory ceremony should be gone through for the 
horses for a week in the Holy House. 

AUT WT SAT: 

GNetarawaes: gira saeat gaa | 

garea draagarg slant gat eq ov 

AEUNTA TTT THEA aT arsatarat | 
CA zee 
PISANI AA AT (AGwAats lilt 


Sloka 7—The horses that are worshipped thus 
ought not to be spoken to harshly or beaten. Their 
fears must be dispelled through the sounds of Punyaha 
hymns, conchs, musical instruments and songs. 


mASeASTy GUTS TTA saa: | 
sraiuzaaara grasa aat Fy lit 


Sloka 8.—When the 8th day has dawned, a her- 
mitage strewn with holy grass and tree barks should be 
constructed to the south of the arch and facing the 
north. In front of this hermitage, fire should be made 
on a sacrificial altar. : 

The commentator quotes here authorities for the constfuction 
of altars. For a sacrificial altar, the dimensions required 
are 64 oubits, for the marriage of the four classes in ee Order, 
9 cubits, that diminished by an eighth and so on, 

AY A BRAT: 

wmedsig qeegea usr TeaATa: | 

UWBesiltayTs TE: UAT: BE tl 


ae TAGGING easaaiyaag aa 
SMAUNRAMAGAIIGTNMAETTT ISU 


336 geedigaiamy [Adh. XLIV. SI. 10-14. 


dat awarat BeeqtraraATaTEeal: | 
AMSAN BTA Aaa arauasil FT Ueoli 
HOUT HAL AFATAWIAS AAT | 
ALAAATHRAYUNATATH ITE U2 20 


Slokas 9-I1.—Sandalwood, costus, madder, orpi- 
ment, red arsenic, Priyangu, Vacha, Danti, Amrita creep- 
er® Saubhanjana, turmeric, Suvarna pushpa, Agni-mantha 
(Premua Spinosa), Girikarnika, Purna!'osa, Katambara, 
Trayamana, Sahadevi, Nagapushpa, Kapikacchu, Sata- 
vari and Somarajee—these sacrificial materials are put 
into full pots and then the collection is to be offered in due 
form to the fire along with edibles of various kinds, 
mostly consisting of honey, Payasa and barley prepa- 
rations, 


afacraraigeataranaaeataiat: aaa | 
THAR TAT HASAT YAH 1122 
Sloka 12.—The sacrificial twigs required are of 
Khadira, Palasa, Indian fig tree, Kasmari and Aswattha. 


One who wishes for prosperity similarly should make the 
sacrificial ladle of gold or silver. 


gaifage: tary tare aa: fear wat | 
Abeasadlt qrafangalieatea: 1122 i 
Sloka 13—The King who is in the height of glory 
and accompanied by a veterinary surgeon and an astro. 
loger, should take his seat on a tiger-skin facing the East 
in front of the fire. 


aarat aaaita aeaafial adexeat & | 
Yighinamsgrntacray QOH: 


Adh. XLIV.S1. 15-16.] sqarenftsitseara: 339 


Sloka 14.—The symptoms of the altar, priest and 
fire given in my work Yatra in connection with sacrifices 
to the planets and Indra’s Banner should be noted care- 
fully here too. 

aut @ qraat aay - 

qeagaa aed an laaia sartzurg t 

VR Brmiaai Raaeamasas ui 

aqaguikazaiaagaitarg Hea t 

miqhaoqawaaaang at fear 

aut a Gwizaa | 

ert eMA a TeAITASAS gL ap ul- 

aire a giaa: wafararaiagaqegayy | 

wmsa euitisaiasgd Maaets a aq. 

ate Qaarauivemt geqwgqqaia au 

aa aasang! See pp. 323-324, supra. 

aur ayeReanaeaaa— 


“~A. 


QBlesaaaay aayqeaetania u 


BING ATi farqat wa aha aay | 
AEAUAAN FAA TI QIUsslad Heat Weal 
MAMINTTS AYMARA ATI TSAAT | 
SCE. MUDIFICRCOIMU Geet mie d| 


Slokas 15-16,—A horse with good features and an 
excellent elephant, atter being consecrated, bathed and 
honoured with new white cloths, perfumes, garlands and 
incense, should be brought slowly with coaxing words 
under the arch of the hermitage, with the quarters re. 
sounding with the noice of musical instruments, conchs 
and Punyaha hymns. 

For the features of horses and elephants, see LXV] and 
LAVII reapectively infra. 

@. G- 43 


333 geedigatara [Adh. XLIV. Si. 17-21. 


aaalaageianrad sa: agitaca | 
T AAA IT AeA: AAA ATA Teargy Molt 


NA? A 


AAA wg? stay Wes Raarany | 
Talat sawald aiee Aca amar lll 
Slokas 17-18,—If the horse or elephant brought into 

the Holy House should stand with its right leg uplifted, 
then the King would soon vanquish his foes without 
difficulty ; if it stands frightened, it augurs ill to the 
King. The activities of elephants and horses betoken- 
ing good and bad results, which have been dealt with at 
length in the Yatra, should be applied to lustration also 
according to the circumstances. 

. Vide XOIUTI-5.13. 14; XCIV-11,12 and 13, supra. 
eendaesy aqeguiea ative a ale Ag | 
mara Tags lasaseaaaea: 2S 

Sloka 19.—The priest should give the horse a rice 
ball duly sanctified with holy bymns; if it should smell 
or eat it, the King would come out victorious; and in 
the contrary circumstance, it would lead to the King’s 
defeat. 


TORT WAT SAA WISTANT | 
Utaanwancad sat aT Uo 
Sloka 20.—The priest should dip a branch of the 
Indian Fig tree in the holy waters of the pots and touch 
therewith the horses along with hymns expiatory and 
propitiatory. The same thing should be done for the 
army, the King and the elephants. 


aia ueltaet gear yarsfrareadaea: | 
aqaat fatraegediasd fm 2h 


Adh. XLIV. Sl. 22-26] aqaearftatsvara: 339 


Sloka 21.—Again, after going through the expiatory 
ceremony, for the prosperity of the kingdom, the priest 
should pierce the heart of the enemy made ‘of clay with 
a spike, chanting the hymns used in Black magic. 


aisa eara caataaesy Kigaaal WaT | 
ABMNTHTT WAMU HT: TS NL 
Sloka 22.—Then the priest gives the sanctified bits 

to the horse. Thereupon, the King mounting the horse 
after receiving lustration should proceed northward with 
his army. 
THIF A ACLSAUATATIATTM aaa: | 
aaarasweraaassacIiwaiay NACATT MVMl 
ears tamadsixns aaaaks YRAMA | 


AMNEAITTATMAALTMAS ALATA: NI 
a ‘CA 
HIMAMAMANAZ AN BHEHCAT HS: | 
ara hungquaa: REHEAT TART URI 

los ° m~ ¢ 
seaqaigita @ THAT ceaTaTAT | 
isatititaritat: awaeaitaa saya: 1124 

Slokas 23-26,—The King should proceed in the 
following manner, The breeze should be scented by the 
dripping ichor of elephants that are gladdened by the 
sounds of tabors and conchs. The King shines like the 
Sun in autumn owing to the mass of glittering rays 
issuing from his crest jewels. His beautiful garlands and 
clothes are shaken by white chowries disseminating waves 
of fine fragrance Just as the Himalayas is surrounded by 
the rows of swans flying hither and thither. The King 
adorned with jewels of various colours, diamonds, crown, 
ear rings and armlets and brightened by the rays 


JAN qeediverara, [XLIV. 27-28. XEV:. ¥ 


aenemnnemnnmeenanemetnnnnemmemanimmememmntins 


of numerous gems, creates the lustre of ‘a rairn-bow. 
The King is accompanied by horses springing up to the 
sky, as it were, by elephants tearing up as it were the 
earth and by warriors who have defeated their enemies 
just as Indra is attended upon by the Gods who have 
defeated their foes. — 
ATATHIHS TISAI aA asa eTT: | 
THAT TAWA TTA IS Ys YT? Roll 
Sloka 27.—Or, he should proceed being adorned 
with diamonds and pearls, having garlands, head-dress, 
ointment and clothes, al] white, an umbrella held over his 
head, and mounting an elephant, just as Venus does on 
a cloud’ having the Moon above him. 
eat ' 
AeAVAaAra Agar rset fy Ag | 
fafienatradiet aa Ueaataaea wt waq Nit 
Sloka 28.—One whose army consists of soldiers, 

horses and elephants ina jolly mood, who shines with 
the lustre of glittering weapons, is free from all unna- 
tural mental dispositions and appears dreadful to the 
hosts of his enemies, will soon conquer the whole earth. 

Thus ends the 44th Adhyaya on “‘ Lustration Ceremony "’ 


camel 


SRIHOANTTT (UV4ll Wagtail. 


GAA TNs al Mensa cay 144 | 
rena aa gia: wana aie vara] Ute 
Sika 1—I mean expounding in this chapter the 
effééts ehuriciated by ancient sages as pertaining to the 
first sight of the bird called Wagtail. 
In Bamnil,-the bird is known as erarc. pegged, 


Aidh. XLV. S). 2-6.] quraeniteitseara: 34t 


Khanjanaka (@taa) will not generally be seen in the sky 
duting the four months beginning with Sravana (ata). 


CYSYRTHRS: FNMA ATHLA AL: | 
MMOSEAH MN: APTA TWIAINY UT 
Hunt ese eg: Manresa atagize | 
Gat Wt eid BARE BAA TS UI 
Slokas 2-3.—A variety of wagtails named Bhadra 
with a stout body and a dark, long and raised neck is 
auspicious. One which is dark from the face to the 
neck and termed ‘Sampurna ' (full) fulfils one’s ambi- 
tion. The one called ‘ Rikta’ or empty has dark spots 
on the neck and white cheeks. It leads to disappoint: 
ment. The one called Gopeeta which is yellow in 
colour produces trouble when sighted. 
aul BJ SByaq: - 
CYSISEFMASIS! Al AF: FMTS; ETA: | 
SMT Tea a: @ age gia ewTa: ti 
sized faa we son fecha aa 
q@ ite gta free: drat aidras: vga: u 
atargern as freaat ePisrz | 
HY TAaUURBGTAASY TBST geay | 
earaaagingigiamerag lvl 
artgaaaqagrarusasarage | 
SRAIHAMSESTTTAATAT II! 
SaaA TT aaaTH AS IS TAA USAT | 
afaqaaeages a a GMa HVT tt 
Slokas 4-6.—-A wagtail in the following places tends 
to prosperity : on trees bearing fragrant flowers and 
sweet fruits, on holy lakes and rivers, on the heads of 
elephants, horses and serpents, on temples, gardens and: 


342 | qeeafgerarg [Adh, XLV. SI. 7-10. 


mansions, near cows, mangers, assembly of righteous 
men, sacrifices, auspicious functions, Kings and Brah- 
mins, on elephant-yards, stables, umbrellas, flags, chow- 
ries and other royal appendages, near gold, on white 
cloths, lotuses, blue lilies, places of worship, paved and 
cleaned spots, on curd-pots and corn-ricks. 


TE Braaanaaets Tea | 

Mesa Tah: THEM Tale: Isl 

YeIsdaAg as aadisgay way da | 
| antiarat faaqaaagarg ici 


Slokas 7-8.—When the wagtail is seen perched 
on mud, sweet food will be obtained; ona heap of cow- 
dung, excellent milk and its products; on green grass, 
clothes ; on a cart, devastation of the country ; on the 
roof of a house, loss of wealth will be the result; ona 
piece of hide, imprisonment; on filth, disease, and on 
backs of goats and sheep, immediate union with ‘one’s 
beloved. 


aietensaaaTATERTTSUTS: 
MACARHTT ABA ATS AIT: UI 


Sloka 9.—It is inauspicious and tends to danger 
from death and disease if the wagtail is seen perched 
on a buffalo, camel, donkey, bone, burial ground, corner 
of a house, clod of earth, turrets, compound walls, heap 
of ashes or hair. 
| ax is another reading for ag. 

agt geamge ga: aq ait Ramdar | 
ba’ ba’ 
GANA WTA ASKS: USTASAAT Moll - 


Sloka 10.—It is inauspicious when a wagtail is seen 
flapping its wiggs ; when itis seen drinking water from 


Adh. XLV. Sl. 11-14.] qaraearfésitsvdra: 343 


a river, it gives auspicious results; also when seen in the 
early morning. In the evening, it forebodes evil. 
dasa fara aa feat wad TN aay | 
A 
TATA aaa sarafatqsns neu 
Sloka 11.—If a King observes at the end of a lus- 
tration ceremony a wagtail flying in a particular direc- 
tion and marches in that quarter, he will surely subju- 
gate his enemies there before long. 
~ CA AD TA an 
atafaaaata agaata ae 
afar scala at asia Brag | 
aqragiieaed qissse 
AHARTAIANT MAgeay N22 
Sloka 12.—There will be treasure underneath the 
place where the wagtail] copulates ; mica, where it vomits ; 
and where it voids its excrements, there will be charcoa) 
in the earth. To satisfy one’s curiosity, one may dig the 
earth in the place. 
AAW A BIZAT: 
wyat ger aa aa a fatrarfeia 
ye okaa aa aa sraad 73g u 
gle aq Hear aaryt asa 1 
aatras fihanig: qagaaanerg: aa | 
aqpaitiadiaaaal ala a aeqaarrara: 2 ll 
Sloka 13.—The bird being dead, crippled, wounded 
or diseased produces effects similar to the condition of 
its body. If’ it comes to roost in one’s front, the person 
will get wealth; if it flies up into the sky, it indicates 
one’s meeting with one s kith and kin. 


Triads wa YaIeA TAAaes aalad Aaeaqrg | 
qiftsa AYBAT VAM MaeeaATa. way Ue vl 


d4 @uedtcaram (XLV. 15-16. XLVI. 1. 


Stoka 14.—A King too, while observing an auspi- 
cious wagtail at an auspicious place, should make offer- 
ings consisting of fragrant flowers and incense on the 
ground. By acting thus, he will obtain prosperity and 
mych prized happiness. 


MUAAR Rees werd Rqeagquad Ta | 

aq galagd aargara aie gait a aq ataye les 
Sloka 15,—Should a King espy an ill-omened wag- 

tail, he would not meet with evil consequences, provided 

he engages himself in worshipping Brahmins, preceptors, 

pious men and Gods, and also abstains from flesh for 

seven days continuously. 


qraaeaaa aa we stata a Raaera | 
¢ “ 
fremraghrondareaciae tana 124 
Stoka 16.—The effects of the first sight of a wag: 
tail will be felt within a year; and of the daily sight, 
within the end of the day. The effects must be care- 
fully determined after examining the quarter, place, phy- 
sical features, the Lagna, the asterism, position with 
respect to the Sun, etc. 
AM AF BA: 
HUN AN WHAT TART: | 
awaatas asa qaasaaa Gay U 
Thus ends the 45th Adhyaya on “ the sight of Wagtail ”. 


SSNAISATA: 118811 Portentous Phenomena, 


Ads, XLVi1. S$}, 2-3.) weaerntitseara: gS 


Sloka, 1.—I shall now treat of portemes -euadiated 
by Atri and expounded by Gaoga after hmm.. The fol- 
lowing is a summary of them: Amything contrary to 
nature is termed a portent or Utpata. 

amt a aaraetkaran i 

q: sBiafaqaia: aa: wera qe seqra: | 

fafanraQeaman agar yeast waa 11 

PTT RNY UTTTTTA | 
earaeg Rencaiaatarea Tea bh 

Sloka 2.—Sins accumulate as a result of wrongful 
actions committed by men; and troubles arise from 
them as a consequence. The three kinds of portents, 
viz, celestial, atmospheric and terrestrial, foreshadow. 
such troubles. 

aut a Tt: | 

wfasngaaig WaragcaTa: | 

aaqarueaag@at: Tada Ul 


AIMAUATANITIA LIAM. Farag | 
aeaaqara at: area we vgefia WH 
Sloka 3.—Displeased with the misdeeds of men, 


the Gods create these portents. The King shovwid’- cause 


expiatory ceremonies to be performed'in ordcr ‘to ward 
off their evil consequences, 


AI TT: | 

aatsTat Aaiaragisats Saar: 

a Gwar wary eayrqeaaag oi 
aga aaeterargena zaiafaar: | 
fwara Prana Se: aearaiy a i 
arg aremedatigre eater Merayyar | 
saqiea git there wauriteer:.y, 


@uedigaraa, (Adh. XLVI: St: 46,. 


& gq asaifwar a: arat ager & | 
WHAT: ageita a a afta waaay t 
Qqa aagata feaaaaartaar: | 
afteqaauar staigagaenrar Farr 0 
Red teqapagentasiaraaaeaT: | 
THqTAGWRTAITS ATeaita aq wen 
At autres aeartahiaga Tagt? | 
araagita agai meas al Reahrars Wai 
Slekas 4-5.—The celestiai portents consist of the 
unnatural behaviour of planets and asterisms, meteors, 
thunders, storms and halos; the atmospheric ones, of 
aerial cities, rainbows, etc.; and the terrestrial ones 
arise from the moving and the stationary objects. This 
last class can be warded off through expiatory rites; the 
atmospheric can be mitigated, while ‘the celestial accord- 
ing to some cannot be so assuaged. 
aur W Tit: I 
walgeqaqaneanresrgTzy | 
RA aeawa ag ateahaia siftag nu 
qrtamearcatazaretiaqaaa & | 
wage Wagar a aZrargeaRarag 
FAIA US VUray ay aFAaAy | 
| aRaTRS Veigewa TeviGay u 
amt & qaleaizarany ul 
fasa seatard ala ate fercating aw) 
farareiesrtaa qhtaara fyaqeraay, tl 
aul @ SEIT: 
ta anted angaitsia wlsaq | 
mrad | Sat Tia RsageragwTad v 
Reqnit gage npasraraiadigiss | 


BRIA A AMR rerg Hiei v4 


Adh. XLVI.SI. 7-8] camarftetsea: = (34 


Sloka 6.—Even the celestial portent might’ be 
warded off by the profuse gifts of gold, food, cows ‘and 
lands ; by the ceremony of milking cows in the precincts 
of a Siva temple and by Koti Homa (crore of minor 
sacrifices). 


ARAFARAMCAGANT MAT Bie z | 
TRTTIMA T7 TWaTTATAT TIN Ii! 

_, Sloka7.—A celestial portent wields adverse influ. 
ence on the King in 8 ways, vig,, on himself, his children, » 
treasury, vehicles, his town, consorts, preceptors and 
subjects. 

AUT | Te: | 
Gt wats STH areasy Taga | 
gtvanait zag wad taaeg i 


(I) Portents through idols or statues of the Devas 
° in Temples. 


Sra aR TSAa MA TIAT TAT | 
femralraaiat aaa atazarary Vel 


Sloka 8.—The breaking, moving, sweating, shedding 
tears, falling, muttering, etc., of Siva lingas (Siva’s em- 
blems), Idols of Gods and Temples, without any cause, 
fore-bode the ruin of Kings and their lands. 

AM @ wit: | | 

qearel: swzaiea Qarq qetsPa ar | 

Byres caha aeenta afta ar 

witera frdretta sarara qatar ar | 

gata Rigas « nergy ti 
warerar ar fasite eurareatt watta at | 


a] : 
Sree CT -vRE CE TT TET - 


ahd gauttaam [Add. Xi Sh Batt 


nani @ maui at Wert waita at | 
SAAMATT GATT she wa: 


ATA ARTA A HTT ATTA 
APTAANTATEA AF AVITYART: 18M 
Sloka 9.—The brealing or falling down, of the, axle, 
wheel, yoke and flag of the car during a temple-festival 
or the being twisted, the destruction and the entangle- 
menmt.of the above things, do not lead to.the well-being 
the King as well as of his country. 


ataitaraigd Ia fearatara | 
UZABISTUN HA TAAAE AT lkalt 
srefraasa ied qiaal Aoys 7 Bierate | 
Vrqraaage avssarat Aca vA 
rae ara Aaae ted WEA 
qait aaanain sexceara izeq uean - 
arena Tes FR | 
TALI FA HAUNTS TET TE 1 RY 
TURAINgEaTAUATas Giey, | 
PUAACTEAS SATA TEATS! RBH 
Stokas 10-I4,—Any unnatural behaviour observed 
in the images of sages, Yama, Manes and Brahmatt 
foreshadows evil to the Brahmins; one inthe images of 
Siva and the protectors of the-quarters, to the cattle. 
one in the images of Jupiter, Venus and Saturm, tq, the 
priests; of Vishnu, to, the people; of Skanda and 
Visakha, to the potentates of principalities: of Sage 
Vyasa, to the minister; of ord) Ganapati, to. the Com- 
minder of the army; . af the: Grvater aad Kiawakeeio, 


Ad@h, KILYVI, 3). 95-17.) tescaetetsenara: A 
betokens the destruction, of the-people. Any unnatural 
feature seen in the idols of Gods, in the figures of boys, 
girls, women and servants indicates the ruin of the 
King’s sons, daughters, harem and servants. Sinsilarly 
ome seen in the idols of demons, goblins, Yakshas, and 
serpents, leads tothe same result. All these: porteats 
produce their effects in eight months. 


ag! Saftart ge gitareseliva: are | 
MASAAUGSIATACE TARA AAT UPI 


a CAA 


WPIST TU HEaaaia fags | 
matte Geatehrrccaey TBH HAH 


Slokas 15-16.—On, seeing portents in the. .idols of 
Gods, the priest, being clean after a bath, and fasting for 
three days, should worship them (idols) with ablutions, 
flowers, pastes anc: garments. He: should. alsp paogitiate 
thems with the offerings of Madhuparka, (a mixture af fixe: 
ingwettients), eatables amd other presents, and offer ita: 
the Sacred fire, cooked rice according to rules, with; tha. 
hymns addreseed, te the deitias.. 


afa Rgafrant wreaa: ager 
ftaAqeanrat atereierary | 
* fatacatiarte sgt a tat 
aala ghavat Taare, BE: Woh. 

Sloka 17.—{f kings perform properly the expiatory 
rites for 7 nights along with worship and Dakebina to 
Brahmins and Gods, and also with songs, damee: and 
festivities, whenewer they see a: portant of Gade, thay will 
not exp2rieage, tae eudl. eMacts of the paxtents. 


$86 quediteaa [Adh: XLVI. Sl. 18-22 


{2) Portents through Fire. 


Us Tara agers stead | yeqaary | 
aaaata Fret TA FT WEE AAT Ilecil 
Sloka 18.—If there be flames without fire and fuel 
in any country, it forebodes trouble to the King and his 
dominions. 


saatagsist aaaaras cect THY Ua | 


Reamragty a ara aH GST UN 


Sloka 19.—If fire is observed on water, flesh or 
anything wet, it indicates the King’s death ; on weapons, 
a sanguinary war; and if the fire goes out in military 
camps, villages or towns, there will be danger from fire. 


MACAAMTASTAAST TAT | 
alent at wala waRAITA fraAT Rell 
Sloka 20.—If temples, houses, triumphal arches, 

flags and the like are burnt, without fire or by lightning, 
there will undoubtedly be an invasion by a foreign 
eneiny. 

YAUSHAAAA ATMA AeAITT | 

say freggaal caaalt aie ctraeq (122 


Sloka 21.—Smoke produced without fire, dust and 
darkness seen at day-time, the disappearance of the 
stars ona cloudless night and their aaa at day- 
time, tend to very great peril. 

Oat eS aah: | 

strats ante aie ar ctaa ct: 

qaaratan an an Reqreagy7g 


‘ANAT STAZ Aa ATH SATAATE: | 
THRASH: geareaaaiedeg: ez 


Adh: XLVI. St. 23:25.] ezeatftehswara 351: 


Sloka 22.—F lames proceeding from towris; animals 
birds and men are said to forebode danger, and smoke, 
fire and sparks observed in beds, cloths ‘and hairs, the 
ownet’s death. 

‘AMT @ TT: | 

Wanaqaaey suarawirg « | 

cgara regis ar qatar awa aq 


mQaTTaTT ITAA: dratvindyana a | 
wears ae TTasr aay UgMAS IVT [RA 


Sloka 23,—The blazing, moving, sounding, rushing 
out of the sheath, trembling or any other unnatural phe- 
nomenon of the sword foreshadows a dreadful war and 
confusion in the near future. 


wartaa: depareaatwetasasea: a: atta T aI 


Megat Wa gears Ta ay werd AVATAR I 

Stoka 24.—The expiation to be performed for por- 
tents of fire, etc., consists of a sacrifice to the fire with 
white mustard seeds, ghee and the twigs of milky trees, 
to the accompaniment of hymns addressed to the Fire 
God, and of gifts of gold to the Brahmins. 


(8) Portents connected with Trees. 


Varasaaggint Migaxmay! 
aaa taxa Tea a safyageayz IR: 


&loka 25.—If the branches of trees break down all 
of asudden (without any cause), preparation for war 
should be foretold; if the trees produce a laughing 
sound, ruin of a country’will be the result; and if they 


produce a weeping sound, there will be a rich crop of 
Riean na 


Sha aerate, DARK, XIOVT Slate 


anaes qieraisht gavte ae + 
gate atears adxeryat wala 124 


Sloka 26.—If trees yield flowers (and fruits) out of 
season, the country will be thrown into confusion (dis 
integration) ; if a tender plant blossoms very luxuriantly, 
children will die; and if milk flows from trees, all sub- 
stances will be destroyed. 

aut WS TP: ; 

WUR*NT Hea GAQTAANATT | 

areat aeot Hargiwrat BVTEITHT 

SOR ICCC REC CME G RE (Cm (HE 
te tans aaa Prat ass 2011 | 
Sloka 27.—If wine flows from trees, vehicles will be, 


destroyed ;. if blood, there will be war; if honey, diseage ;. 
pi eS ~ of famine; and if water, there will be’ reat, 


meee ey epee: ara 3 ear 
after at wt saeits 4 ARC 
Sloka 28.—If withered trees sprout up: again and 
healthy ones wither away, there will be the decay of 
strength (powerful men) and food, and if fallen trees 
stand erect’by themselves, there is fear of divine visi- 
tations. ‘ 
Uta Aga g_Ans aizata FAfzeq | 
TAMAL SATS TSaaT waraala Hag 
Sloka 29.—If a worshippable tree should bear 
flowers and fruits out of season, or if there be smoke, or 
ftame’ on, it, the desttuction of the King is indicated. 


aig aey, SUI, Tt qa ase: 
gaat tae caftale: wefiaes 1120) 


Sloka 30.—The walking or talking of trees presages 
the annihilation of the population. The portents of trees 
bear fruit within ten months. 


TAWA oF aaah wets | 

Seat frst SxatisaA Heal Vera FAT Ta state 132i 
qada agate asa Tagaa yaa | 

Ara aarr caer aya aega Rag: 1320 


Slokas 31-32.—Putting an umbrella over it, the 
tree should be worshipped with garlands, perfumes, in- 
cense and cloths. An image of Siva should be placed 
under it and the hymn called Rudra chanted repeatedly ; 
and only six offerings made with the fire with the hymn 
“Hail to the Rudras.”” Then the King should feed 
Brahmins with Payasa, honey and ghee. The Dakshina 
laid down by those interested in the weal of the country 
in connection with the portents of trees, is in the form 
of gifts of land. 


(4) Portents connected with crops. 


aessaaqiciaaamy Baar aT | 
eyaia aarardiat aas wd a _FquHeT (3A 
Sloka 33.—lIf the stalk of lotus, barley or wheat has 


a branch or two, it forebodes its owner’s death; so does 
a double fruit or flower. 


aida: aaat ararnwZqaarAT 3a | 
wala fe aeRtey aR Faatq Uv 


Sloka 34.—If there is an overluxuriant growth of 
crops and varieties of flowers and fruits on a single tree, 
there will certainly be an invasion by a foreign power, 

w. d- 45 


354 qusiteerm (Adh. XLVI. SI. 3589, 


7 


ada aa ad asia frarardasar al Bg | 
AAA TAA Il T MeaMKT TAT VAAN 

Sloka 35.—When sesamum seeds yield only half 
the quantity of oil or no oil at all, and food loses its 
taste, one snoul.l know that there is great danger im- 
pending. “a 
ABIssA ES a graizaaT gua: Brag | 
METIS AG Bal Maca ar TAs Wea 131 
aa a ear Aad ada acaaea aad Bye | 

x ~ a 6 ° dX 

TAT TET ASAT AT HI AT AT TAINS TMZ 112091 

Slokas 36-37.—An unnatural flower or fruit should 
be removed from the village or town. For the expia- 
tion of the portent, cooked rice should be offered to Soma 
and a goat sacrificed, On seeing any unnatural pheno- 
menon in the crop, the field itself should be made over 
to Brahmins at first; and atthe centre of the field, the 
owner should make an offering of cooked rice to the 
Earth. By so doing, he will not experience the evil 
effects of the portents. 

(5) Portents connected with Rainfall. 


qaqa! Baa WAT q | 
Ua aagqaaat Jaatatsa aaa Nt 
Sloka 38.—Drought foretells famine ; excessive rain, 
famine and threat of foreign invasion; untimely rain, - 
disease ; and rain without clouds, the King’s death. 
RATATAT Al AFaTTT @ Azazag | 
PHARETT UTAT CAAA TRS 
Sloka 39.—Cold in the hot season and heat in the 
gold season, and the seasons not functioning properly, 


Adh, XLVI. SI, 40-44,] eqeeafteitseara: 355 


foreshadow danger to the kingdom, fear of disease ame 
divine visitation in six months. 

HTH AE ATTY THATIATTY | 

~ ON et aS 

TH Tait atarwaaearH: voll 

aeawoITSHSSgA TAT frag | 

ART TTT ATAU TMT v2 

Slokas 40-41 —Continuous rain for seven days in 

any season but the rainy, denotes the death of the chief 
sovereign. If there be a rain of blood, there would be 
war ; of flesh, bones, marrow and the like, epidemics; of 
corn, gold, tree-barks, fruits, etc., peril; and of burning 
coal and dust, the particular town will be destroyed. 


sre Far wea Har at aitrat aat zen: | 
ex Aalst TaraMiiaasHagra NV 
Sloka 42.—When there is a rain of stones without 
clouds “or of unnatural animals, or during an excessive 
tain when there is some spot without any rain whatso. 
ever, the crops would get the six-fold pest. (P. 61, supra.) 


agaaiaint geal weet a 
satan saisaag alte aqgeq Wes 
Sloka 43.—When there is a rain of milk, ghee, 
honey, curds and hot water, the ruin of the country is to 
be predicted ; and when there is one of blood, war among 
kings will be the result. 
This Sloka is omitted in some editions, 
AIAGSH SA A CITA TITY TAT AT | 
27a aa guegamard Afateaq lve 
Sloka 44.—If trees cagt no shadow even when the 
Sun shines -brightly, or if the shadow is in the same 


356 geeatearara [Adh. XLVI. Sl. 45-49: 


direction as the Sun, it should be predicted that great 
calamity is in store for the country. 
Say TAAETIT AT ACT TITASTAT TA | 
MSUAWA I Al AAT FRA Tre lvl 
Sloka 45.—If there be rainbow in a cloudless sky by 


day or night, in the east or west, then there will be great 
peril from starvation. 


aaeqrsteqaai etal aT: VIAT TVTBIATS | 
araranaaacany saan maga wy West 
Sloka 46.— A sacrifice to the Sun, the Moon, Cloud 
and Wind has been ordained at the time of a portentous 
rain. If gifts of corn, food, cows and gold are also 


made to Brahmins, the sin arising from the above por- 
tent will disappear. 


(6) Portents connected with Water. 
arate aiat Mug zara Fea | 
TAACATATNAETT AT LIAANT vl! 
agiaeataaan TETHST: TATE, | 


WASAMAT AT? KAAled Waa livell 


Slokas 47-48,—The receding of rivers from a town 
and the drying up of never-drying rivers or other places 
such as lakes, make the town desolate before long. If 
the rivers carry oil, blood or flesh, be turbulent or filthy 
and flow upwards, they indicate attack by a foreign 
enemy after six months. 


STOTYARI AHN Vz HATA | 
narskeais 3 saaceraaigei west 


Adh. XLVI. SI. 50-53] qaucaritattsvars: 357°. 


- 


Sloka 49.—If wells show flames, smoke, ebullition, 
crying sound, shouting, singing and talking, they are said 
to tend to the mortality of the pepulavon: 

aiearcaald WIAs J Tarany | 


AasaanIga a aeKa aa aTiPahray ott 
Sloka 50,—When water springs up from the earth 
without any digging, when the taste and smell of it 
undergo a change, or, when there is some unnatural 
occurrence in tanks, etc, great danger is to be appre- 
hended. The following is the remedial measure to be 
adopted in that case. 
a eaIK FAT Tat TTA TWVRyer: | 
aa FTN TAA TragTaTa 4A 
Sloka 51.—During a watery portent, Varuna should 
be worshipped with hymns addressed to him and with 
the same hymns meditation (Japa) and offerings to 
the Fire should be made. By so doing, the sin can be 
warded off, 


(7) Portents connected with Births. 
qaqa eat eixaawaaasscaar ar | 
Kaaiwas 3 cagvagar wala WezM 

Sloka 52.—When women give birth to monstro- 
Cities, or two, three, four or more children at a time, long 


before or after the usual period, ruin befails the country 
and the family. 


TSANCMEIMEaAy asies AHATN | 
rT e A « “A 
CUA VIS Alea BR FT MATT NAM 


Sloka 538.—If mares, camels, she-buffaloes, cows and 
cow-elephants bring forth twins, it augurs the death of 
hese mothers. The effect of such births will come to be 


358 geeh@araay [Adh. XLVI. Sl. $4-$7; 


felt six months later. The following two verses of 
Garga deal with the expiation therefor. 
AM A Ti: | 
NeIS TA Va Bertdswai Ja: | 
MAWMNTAAT Gq BAA Waa at 
RAW Sosa aeqaswraly ar | 
AAR MMB A eater: ataaiea ar ti 
agar: wracnraadgewa at 
fata aa ara sea a famigha i 
MATTIAS WA Ft Agsaaqaarsis ar | 
mee fararans waraeasaat Wazq tt 
aval eRaadt mal afz qa sqaa | 
faaed tage aria veftalatiara: 
ara: zea faa MEAT Trarftar | 
qiay Hay Bla: Alea Baa BAT UeVvi 
VAI: BGM Tyzlay | 
aM aaa Qaaeqa g aTaAT U4 
Slokas 54-55.—Such of the women as give birth to 
twins should be removed from the place and left in 
another country by one that wishes for happiness, He 
should also please Brahmins with things desired by them 
and cause an expiatory ceremony to be performed, 
As for the quadrupeds, they should be removed from 
their flock or herd and left in other countries ; otherwise, 
they will ruin their town, owners and herds, _ 
(8) Portents connected with Quadrupeds, 


qattaranad aaa faegraany Yaar | 
SSI areas Pah at at geagay 148 
| aan Reanaags waaay | 
5) TEMA ATIaT Mle Tor Set soit 


Adb. XLVI. S1. 88-60.) seueartatsvatat - 359 


Slokas 56-57,—\f quadrupeds mate with animals of 
a.different kind, or cows with cows, oxen with oxen, 
era dag sucks a calf, it is inauspicious and forebodes 
foreign invasion undoubtedly in three months. The 
following two verses have beentaught by Garga for 
counteracting the evil effects of such portents. 

AYt a NT: | 

feaifag gar ata atara: sarad | 

AUecialayl AAA ar aA ary az tl 

UAMSAW! Tara Sis a fang ars | 

alaRiegaaa: Wao at a aya 

way We: fatuargera azar | 

ata faggay ag: waATiy ar | 

mag fy aay wast seq 0 


Mal aad Ba AAS WA wag | 
atagianiag sats Beg WC 
AMMA MAT Wat AT tea: | 
MANIA AAT AIRS AATT W4Sit 


Sloka 58-59.—Abandonment, expulsion or making 
a gift of such quadrupeds will immediately remedy the 
portent, The owner should in sucha contingency also 
worship Brahmins and cause recitation and sacrifice to 
be gone through. The priest should make offerings of 
cooked and sanctified rice and of a goat chanting hymns 
addressed to the Creator, and feed Brahmins sumptu- 
ously with generous gifts. 


(9) Portents connected with the Wind. 


aad Tetadh ait Wey ATE Wega | 
Treat aale aa att TTAH | toll 


360 teedfteratg [Adh. XLVI. S1-61-64. 

Sloka 69.—When a carriage moves without horses, 
or does not move when dragged by them, or when the 
wheels stick in the mud or give way, there is imminent 
danger to thc realm. 


sflataqaasar aaa aat at aUerereay | 
MIRA TAT at aeqs weiss 1S 2 
Sloka 61.—When sounds of singing and musical 
instruments are beard in the sky; or moving objects 
(such as carts) become stationary, and stationary objects 
(like trees) move, it forebodes disease or death. When 


musical instruments produce unnatural sounds, there will 
be defeat at the hands of an enemy. 


qateaqaae: Ise aT aeayg ae a Ara | 
SzeTa at dat seat asa AT Nez 
Sloka 62.—When musical instruments produce 
sounds without being struck, or produce no sounds even 


being struck or produce multifarious notes, there will be 
invasion by a foe or the King’s death. 


Ways ay aig eRe | 
MCHAUT A TA BAIT BlaaATT Fl 
Sloka 68.—When ox and plough get entangled, 

when ladles, winnowing baskets, etc., and cooking uten- 
sils show portentous changes, or when they (above uten- 
sils) produce a sound similar to the howling of jackals 
(or when jackals howl’), there will be danger from 
weapons. The following is the instruction of Sage 
Garga for remedying the portent. 


arasaeag aaa BATT | 
AMARA iat sqsa wIaes ULI 


‘Adh. XLVI. SI. 65-68.) saaeanftaitsvara: $61 


ae Teast shone ata | 
TAs Var: Basawy AAA? Null 
Slokas 64-65.—During these aerial portents, the 

King ought to worship the Wind-God with flour of bar- 
ley ; and the Brahmins, being devout and pure, should 
recite repeatedly the five hymns beginning with “ saa ”’ 
The King should worship Brahmins with Payasa and 
Dakshina. Similarly, offerings should be made urito the 
Fire with devotion and efforts, along with Brahmin-feed- 
ing and Dakshinas on a larve scale. 


(10) Portents connected with Animals and Birds. 


gag aaa seat TT Aaa Raa geq | 

AH AW ATA: AINA aT Tecagia 1G Fel 

aga wesqayed aa As Al 

aiqnat eeaqal wraea: Aga AAT Ro 

Slokas 66-67.—Villaze birds roaming in the forest, 

jungle birds getting freely into the town or village; day- 
birds (crows) flying at night ; night-birds (owls, etc.) 
flying at day time; and birds or beasts forming circles 
at dawn and twilight, or howling in groups facing the 
pun, presage danger. 


RYaq AVTea FI aN Hraesa arqar alan 1 
AAARELAIA BAR BTR Fs at use 


Sloka 68—When eagles appear to be weeping, 
jackals facing the Sun howl hideously at the gates of the 
city, or when a pigeon or owl enters the King’s palace, 
danger has to be apprehended. 


Aa: TEEAT: is another reading. 


362 qeiigaraia, [Adh. XLVI. Sl. 69-73; 


aur sna: | 
VAADHABIBIA BAA BIsurlia: | 


wsqrara gareay aia: agar afx u 
eaira fafa aa azary faagala t 
wade ada ar afaata aaléa ar u 
UAAA-TEM A AVBHreaArauwag | 
HIHTHT ATLA SyeTIAl F RST: | 
TASASS aU: TAT AA WATT 1S 
TWaAaawMy ag a WyeaRarana: | 
WIAABFAVTAG RIAN ALATA (N90 II 
Slokas 69-70.—Cocks crowing in the evening, 
Cucloos warbling in the beginning of the dewy season 
(Hemanta), and vultures and the like flying ina circle 
from right to left in the sky, denote danger. If groups 
of birds sit on houses, sacred trees, arches and gates, or 
if honey, anthill and lotus are produced in soca etc., 
ruin will overtake the place. 


ATARUMIUATATATgT Alegly ATH | 

TISSUE FATT ATIATT 98 
Sloka, 71.—When dogs bring bones or parts of dead 
bodies into houses, epidemics will be the result; and 
when quadrupeds and weapons talk like human beings, 
there will be the King's death, The following is the 
Sage’s advice for assuaging the evil ai of such 


portents, 
anyaaanrgy gaigiay aang | 
SAU HANA A A AHSA Talalasts 19 
Bat ala Aa Sar Tra Aga: | 
HISISAGH A Bal Aehaetis FW 


Adh. XLVI. SI. 74-17.) TANT ATTSCATT: 363 


| Blokas 72-73.—During the portents of beasts and 
birds, sacrifices should be p2rform2d along with Dak- 
shina. Five Brahmins should rep2at the hymn begin- 
ning with the words Za1: «gra: and one the hymn “ Sude- 
vah, etc. ”’ (vide Valakhilya 6 4). Or, they may recite 
the Sakuna hymn, the prayer @7,etc. or the Atharva 
Siras. The priests should be given cows and Dakshina. 


(11) Portents connected with Indra's Banner, 
ies Door - bolt, etc. 
xv. x 
VREITTRSAATTUTTTY | 
ARHUSACT STA ATTAATTT Wott 
Sloka 74.—The falling down or breaking of Indra’s 
standard, door-boit, pillar, door, door-leaves, arch or 
flag indicates King’s death. 
AeeTTIA TANIA BaAASAA | 
Poxrart yaseor HET TTA MO4t 
Sloka 75.—Brilliance at dawn and Sunset, the rise: 
of smoke in the forest without fire, the splitting of the 
earth without breach and its tremor cause danger. 
Tavs UaaRat a Ae! AAATMsAT RITATS | 


oy HT Aaa waa aay UAT Ta TIS Arg Mga 

Sloka 76.—The country whose ruler is a friend of 
heretics and atheists, who has abandoned the right cone 
duct, is hot-tempered, malicious, cruel and intent on war 
will go to ruin. 


mei at feieg eghkearqaHgsA TION ger | 
famed: TeteT TANT AA WaeAT_ lol! 
 Sloka 77.—The place where boys strike one anothe» 
holding weapons, sticks and stones in their - hands: 


Sf4. gerafearara, [Adh. XLVI. §).,78-81. 


and.crying ‘‘Strike!, undo!, cut!,. pierce‘” will have 
immediate danger. ; 
SUT SS GTA: | 


afe WAUTaAesesga: GUMaal Wiaeqaraa | 
TESA KyMEwe VanaUIgS Magaiea ui 


aR AAAAsad TWAT | 

WIR MATA TT TT ANT AAT: (W9c ht 

Sloka 78.—A house where figures of monsters or 
ghosts are drawn with charcoal, red-chalk, ete,, or a 


picture of the house-owner is drawn with charcoal, etc., 
will ere long be destroyed. 


BAUIIFIIS FT AIT: Wad Roy |. 
laetiterate FIRE TTT ag MORK 
Sloka 79.—That house, which is full of cobwebs, 
where there is no worship of Gods at dawn and Sunset, 


where there is constant quarrel and where there are 
unclean women every day, will meet with destruction. 


SVe TaTAy faleaeutHary aeagy | 
MaTaaaat Wa: Bika THAT HColl 
Sloka 80.—When goblins are seen, pestilence is 
said to be imminent. For averting these portents, Sage 
Garga has laid down the following expiation. 


WeaMecsisy Tl visaifa gazifer = | 
BTA Hee A asesl T aaAAT M1¢ 2 
Sloka 81.—The King should cause great expiations, 


oblations and large quantities of eatables to be. made. 
There Indra wita his consort should bs worshippad, 


Adb, SLYI.S). 82-86.] sasearttsitssaya: 36h 
(12) Phenomena which are not. Portents.. 


aeTfataaaa RAeTAsTaT Tyee | 
TAAlat AMT: AAATACAgNT 1g 
. Sloka 82.—The appearance of portents at the time: 
ofthe death of a king, devastation of the country hy 
a hostile army, the rising of Ketu or of asolar or a lunag 
eclipse, and also the appearance of the following anaa, 
peculiar to the respective seasons, are not inauspicious. 
Tea ANT TAT gctaaaaamsgars | 
RAGAHAS BiH aaqiea? AAT? ca 
Sloka 83.—One can understand the portents. which 
are occasioned by the peculiar nature of the seasons, and 
so do not Jead to evil effects, from the verses composed 
by Sage Rishiputra and summarized here-under. 
TMAARATRETT SAAT AAA: | 
aq ya AATNTTL llevll 
FAVUSALAMTATT TESA | 
TICE CE CC MCE PEC CCICE M RANT 
Slokas 84-85,—The following portents seen in, the 
menths of Chaitra and Vaisakha (7. é., the spring season). 
are conducive of good results: Thunderbolt, lightning, 
earth-tremor, bright glare at twilight, sounds of loud 
thunder, haloes, dust, smoke (in forests), the Sun being 
crimson at rising and: setting, the appearance. of food 
sweet juices, oi] and abundant flowers and fruits oy trees 
and increased lasciviousness on the part of bulls, and 
birds. 
LN 6 ~~ 
DUCRIUTTKST BAT Argarsay | 


_ waiteraaene paareay lick 


366° gyedi¢arara (Adh. XLVI. SI, 87-91, 


CHIT ACT TH YsTATNTAT | 
aftat wegaay eg wi YH ae coll 
Slokas 86-87.—The following portents seen in 

Summer, 7. ¢.,in Jyeshta and Ashadha, are said to be 
auspicious: the sky tarnishei with shooting stars and 
falling meteors ; the orbs of the Sun an1 the Moon being 
tawny; blaze and explosion without fire, smoke and 
dust filling the sky ; the twilight red like the red lotus; 
the sky resembling the ocean with surging billows; and 
the drying up of the waters of the rivers, 


TRITTTTATT Figgrnrtigny | 
Hrqigdaigel wa ati faa: lice 
alae Talat TETATTGA: | 


awa Rikiteat aig a warzeq lee 
Slokas 88-89.—The following portents are not harm- 
ful in the rainy season ‘— Rainbow, haloes, lightning, the 
sprouting up of withered trees, trembling, upheaval and 
unnatural appearance, rumbling and splitting of the 
earth; rising, overflowing and inundations of lakes, 
rivers and wells; and breaking of mountains and houses. 


evehyaneadiarargacaay | 
sauna THA T ASAT 1 olf 
siaaicarate TaTaaTyT | 
Teast Maran Bee eras 1S ek 
Slokas 90-91.—In autumn, the following portents 
augur well:—The sight of celestial nymphs, spirits, 


Gandharvas, aerial. chariots, marvellous things and pla. 
nets, asterisms and-'stars by day in. the sky; soutids of 


Adh, XLVI.‘SI, 92-96.] vzaeanteitsvare: 369 


singing and musical insruments in the forests and on 
mountain slopes; increase of crops and decrease..-of 
water. 


Rafasaned aay arakeyary | 

walagnearaa Tad TMAATT USA 

feat qarearary aaaltagdat: | 

~ ba) ba Sn Sn" 
THe TATA F sad ATA TAA All 
Slokas 92-93.—In the dewy season, the following 

prove beneficial: cold blast, frost, cries ef birds and beasts; 
sight of demons, Yakshas and such invisible beings? 
aerial voice, the quarters with the sky, forests and moun. 


tains darkened with smoke and the high rising and set- 
ting of the Sun. 


Ravahtaeas Reangaay | 
SURAMUHT UMMA Weil 
Ranaisa: ae asserraiag | 


qagiealat a a: AAT Var eel 

Slokas 94.95.— The following phenomena in winter 
are productive of good effects: snowfall, unnatural 
winds, the sight of deformed and wonderful beings 
(divine ones); the sky resembling dark collyrium, and. 
variegated with the fall of stars and meteors; wonder- 
ful births from women, cows, goats, horses, beasts and 
birds; and unnatural changes in leaves, sprouts and 


creepers. 


RAMA Vd TVs al BAT | 
HAEAT TAT TEA Blase lish 


‘eed qeedigarary [Adh. XLVI. Si. 97:99. 


‘Sloka 96.—The aforesaid, ‘phenomena arising from 
#he special features of the seasons produce good effects, 
if seen in their respective seasons. On the other hand, 
if they are observed in other seasons, the portents prove 
very dreadful. 


Beatiat a a Ma: Beat aa alyaq! 
fear ve caged Te aries saltwA: 1S91 
Sloka 97.—The utterances of madcaps while sing- 


ing, talks of children and the words of women do not fail 
of producing their effects. 


4 aia Say WMATA ATA | 
AMAA IAVITTA AA AW ATetal Sci 


Sloka 98. —This Goddess of Speech is always truth- 
ful; and does not speak, unless induced ; for, first she 
travels among the Gods and then (being induced by 
them) goes to the mortals. 


STAT MATT TAISIA az AVAa ANA WeTIBAT 


BAM ad As sgical ala acfqaracafi Sst 


Sloka 99.~ Though a person does not know how to 
caiculate the positions of the planets, he becomes a favou- 
rite of kings and renowned, by observing carefully the 
pottents. Thus, the secret teachings in the words of 
the sages ‘have been given and by knowing this a man 
can loék into the past, present and future. 


Thus ends the 46th Adhyaya on ‘Portentous Phenomena ’. 


Adh. XLVII. SI. 1-4.] aqeeanteeitseara: 369. 


aqaTAy liz\91| Motley Miscellany. 


eeqieaaragmadl qa aS TAAAAd FT | 

AA ALY AATAY FHT ATS eT uz 

za Tals a qwRAA- 

THA TAAHTATAly TA srs | 
Asad WANA RSA 
aaieaaaale sad TIRANA 
re a ¢ 
MSIAT TA AAHlalaHtaay | 
aaeqE aT VAs TSH Asa TET 13It 
Slokas 1-3—In the beginning of this work I have 

treated, in great detail, of the good and bad effects of the 
celestial and atmospheric phenomena mostly in connec- 
tion with the planets’ courses, conjunctions, wars, paths 
and the like. ‘It does not behove Varahamihira, being 
noted for brevity, to repeat the same subject,’’ so 
some will find fault with him. But those in the know of 
this science should not say that this chapter isa repeti- 
tion of the effects already dealt with, because this 
chapter, entitled ‘ Barhi Chitraka ’—-Peacock’s colours— 
is a well-known chief section of this Samhita (collection) 
[or “since this is an important section of the Samhita, 
men of science should not repeat the subject] and it is 
but the nature of this section to reiterate what has been 


once recounted. If I leave out this chapter, still people 
will blame me. 


saetiaaa alraea: Aaratagara aaa: | 


ananina afadian: aRaaeReARTa VI 
Sloka 4.—All the (non-luminous) planets, radiant 
and moving in the northern paths (art-Naga, 7% -Gaja 


370 | gewiiearara, «= [Adh. XLVII. St, 56. 


et aetetetemetenialimene tame’ 


and @raa-Airavata) conduce to happiness, peace and 
plenty ; but the same, without lustre and moving in the 
southern paths (@a-Mriga, a@#-Aja and @ea-Dahana) 
produce famine, theft and death. 

AUT ST TT: | 

Qiaea: AeA ATaTAfAasie: | 

afe ame: ata aaetafearagr: 

SaraqasEg THawrateni: j 

QM ANMIAKZa- asa aeay 


RBM WITT Tae a PraEMT ASAT 

au: an gaara: Ferg Tal TAA: 4 

Sloka 5.—When Venus is in the asterism Magha 
and Jupiter in Pushya, kings will be happy and free 
from mutual hatred, andthe subjects, contented and 
free from diseases. 


AAS TT: | 
RVANUAA BR TU A TeerTar | 
Renae ss aeaneaAaTAaA ui 
data ae ohiat aat URoli aanaegaaq ar | 
ASMA GANI Talelat War nasa lets sl 
Sloka 6.—1lf planets other than the Sun hurt (by 
going south covering the chief star or cutting) the aste- 
risms Krittika, Magha, Rohini, Sravana or Jyeshta, the 
western country will be afflicted with wickedness. 
AI A Misa | | 
aes ahs sAgaly a Ungoirg | 
ateaita agait wgarsganta: u 
gHa aaa ds Guan a Tela | 
wratea alta: wat: wea a ale 


Adh. XLVII. SI. 7-10.] aasearieattseara: 371 


meat aqersagatuar Raed 
misarat wala fe frat Zaerry | 
yey Agate fF Heagagiat 
Sada I MAAN T ATR M9! 

Slokw 7.—-Should the above plinots be stationed in 
the form of a banner in the East in the evening, there 
would be war among the eastern kings; should it be in 
the middle of the sky, trou'le would befall the Central 
country, provided the planets are rough and pale; and 
not when endowed with bright rays. 

fant BHAA ea a tanrqaratgeat aa | 
diaeuagina fae: wqazeteemitaa: gaq lic 

Sloka 8.—If they resort to the South, the clouds in 
that direction will be destroyed; and if they have 
smaller and rough orbs, war willrage. Good results will 
follow'when they are large and full of bright rays. 


SMA TATE giant TAIT | 


CAM AMTIN ATH! CISATIATT USI 

Sloka 9.—They bestow peace on the kings of the 
Northern countries, if they move along the Northern 
paths with bright rays. If tiny in body andashy in 
colour, they bring harm to the kings of the same region. 

AU BT: | 

saaraiten: TaaisrrzTw WET: | 

eqeara garad aqargeqreray ti 


aaAT AH Agent zASTTiaAeHsaeraag | 


arate at fatatad a ana aia sid atale: aye tt 
Sloka 10, —If the stars of the asterisms with planets 
posited in them .are écovered with smoke, flames’ ang . 


372 geetgarara (Adh. XLVII. Si. 11-13. 


sparks, or remain invisible for no reason, all the subjects 
along with their King will be annihilated. 


fafa ana acer afeaiaan fe aalgeaia aarga gar | 
ATATATTANTMSHAT ANT! WAST sATA 2 VII 

Sloka 11.—If there shine two Moons in the sky, 
Brahmins will soon get great prosperity ; if there be two 
Suns, wars among Kshatriyas will break out; and if 
there be three or more Suns, the world will come to 
an end. 

aut A Tt: | 

feaeq aa te framaagicaay | 

gt ar gat ger arat age ad faecahe 

cer fragt: qaignzagy aaaiguy | 

TAN TAA TIAMAT AATT 

Faaasa TI AWAIT A AIT 
frat waaay FTAA TR | 
QimAy TeIRala Wear wi 
qa asia Aga TAIT TSTEs? ULM 

Sloka 12.—If a Ketu (comet) touches the seven 
sages, Abhijit, the Pole Star and Jyeshta, the clouds and 
work leading to the happiness of mankind will be des- 
troyed and sorrow caused; if it touches Aslesha, there 
will certainly be drought, and the people running for 
succour and troubled by their children will die. 


AVERE Wy Taga away wile FT THT | 
Gina Gea Hea fart a Aitaagey eau 


Sloka 13,—When Saturn passes ‘through the aste- 
risam, called “Front or eastern gates’ (vi#., the seven 


Adh. XLVII. SI. 14-16.] aqaearitettseara: 373 


asterisms from Krittika) and is retrograde, there will be 
a dreadful and long-standing famine, hatred among 
friends and drought. 


aa WT: | 
fama: ata: sagieg wer waa | 
agraata aay faaataeaarad: 
waged Mt heat aaned | 
Teamtancasaccal aie frahs otratsat Prat | 
fe saith agiieaint sagas aA Vil 
Sloka 14.—If Saturn, Mars or Ketu cuts the cart of 
Rohini, what shall I say except that the whole world wil] 
perish, being plunged in the ocean of misery. 
aal GW: | 
{ikoiaez wat Haaageisrar t 
Bgal and Faessy7 a_aay ti 
scala aad sar frat avy waeaada ar | 
AIAAUA GUHA AI HOAYA TATA BAT el 
Sloka 15.—When Ketu is visible always or ‘passes 
through the entire starry firmament, the world with tits 
moving and stationary objects will reap the evil conse= 
quences of past deeds. 
agra Sal etwaen: gRTH 
TBAT AWA BAIT TF Tq | aaz | 
Tat Tal Tal fraaat aaa ged 
e~ A “~, 
STITT YAVTT AT TUICATAT aaTs 124i 


Sloka 16.—The Moon being rough, blood-red and 
bow-shaped, augurs famine and clash of armies; and 
yictory will go to that party which is situated in the 


374 geeaigarara [Adh. XLVII. Sl}. 17-20, 


direction of the string of the lunar bow. When she 
appears to have horns similar to those of cows, cattle and 
crops will be destroyed ; and when blazing or filled with 
smoke, she will certainly bring about the death of the 
King. 

fara: RYH qAT FI MST RATATAT ETT 


CBt UTADA Bhar HeSTT Wer iV 
Sloka 17.—When the Moon is glossy, thick, of even 
horns, extensive, high, travelling north in the ‘aravaret 
(Adh. IX-2, supra), aspected by benefics, and unassoci- 
ated with malefics, she gives great joy and happiness to 
mankind, 


fsadagegataaaeaa 4 gai Tag: | 

alana 4 YA BAST SAlaTTs Bes aoa) Teel 
Sloka 18.—When the Moon conjoins with Magha, 

Anuradha, Jyeshta, Visakha and Chittra on the south, 


it is inauspicious, while on the north or in the middle, 
it is auspicious. 


afta aff water a asqieRizase ar | 
afifata aitaal corccrgitezaraira: 291 
Tease at alata dat TIAATATA TA | 


qraqeeay agieanuad adq Roll 

Slokas 19-20.—A \ine of clouds standing across the 
Sun at its rising or setting is termed a ‘bolt’ (Parigha); 
a second or mock-Sun is Paridhi (halo); a straight staff 
(composed of the Sun’s rays, clouds and wind) resemb- 
ling a rainbow is a “rod” (Danda); the long rays of the 
Sun at rising or setting are named ‘ unerring’ (Amogha) ; 
a ‘straight and fragmentary rainbow is ‘Rohita’ (red), and 
the same, but longer, is Airavata. (Adh. XXX-16, tnfra) 


Aéh. XLVII. SL 21-24.] agaiarftatrseata: 3%6 


AUST SAMA TA ATH TWAT | 
AMARA BATT Taq WR 
afaq aeaans fata: Gaga Tay | 
A AA bat & 
Vata: fava: AA TT Aa Sas ll 
Slokas 21-22.--The period after the Sun hag half. 
set and before the stars have appeared, is called the 
evening twilight ; and that after the stars have lost their 
lustre and before the Sun has half-risen is the morning 
twilight. From the aforementioned symptoms of the 
twilights, one should predict good or bad effects. 
When all of them are glossy, there will be. rain the same 
day; when rough, there will be peril. 
aoa wal Aaa Aas sa ATE Ta: 
far citsaa: fat ataaiag qairac | 
: re A AN 
Raval aqaicancataieiyal at aan 
ae: areas asHAMaAa HA) Aer TIAA RN 
Sloka 23.—When the ‘ bolt’ is unbroken, the sky 
clear, the Sun’s rays (unerring) dark, other rays (other 
than the unerring) glossy, rainbow white, lighting flashing 
inthe northeast, and the tree-shaped cloud glossy or 
embraced by the Sun’s rays, thére will be rain; so also 
when a huge cloud covers the Sun at setting. 
ba Ss _¢ = ee 
WT AM! Hoy Ret BiB ragidg: | 
(an AN b 
ay Ft SAAR AAAMA! ATA TA? URE 
Sloka 24.—In the country where the Sun appears 
partial, crooked, black, small and rough or marked with 
the figures-of crows and other inauspicious things, the 
ruler will probably meet with his end. 
aur Ti: 
MOG! BI BMA a ga: xwasisyar y 
qurel wna at Us ay Aaa y 


376 teeter [Adh. XLVIT. St, 25-28, 


alfedt agqaaid wal afaya Wat gaa: | 
TA TA axa aglamica Asa Feea: ee 
Sloka 25.—If broods of carnivorous birds follow the 
army of a King marching for fight, his army will be 


completely routed; if the birds flyin front, he will be 
victorious. 


araleza ae aeaaqy aeargenaar safrat | 
feed frente at ara WN AAT TAT TIT Nl 
Sloka 26.—I\f at Sunrise or Sunset an army similar 
to an aerial city screens the Sun’s orb, it is to be pre- 
dicted that the King has a war of dire consequences 
in store. 
AUT A Tt: | 
MAA ALA Sal Aeeqrars az wad | 
naae (aaa AAI TAIN 
TA Medsqzager acear frat agqaat a! 
AeA ANITA TU GAT VAUAAT aT Nol 
Sloka 27.—Auspicious is a twilight that is clear, 
resounding with the cries of birds and beasts, not facing 
the Sun, and having gentle breeze; while one spoilt by 
dust, coarse or blood-like brings about the destruction of 
the country. 


agate ard genta aa aa Gaed gaematy 
malt Sifeoed aayratia aaeaaapaay As qT 4G 
Sloka 28.—Here have I expounded without any 
repetition all that the ancient sages have treated of in 
great detail. That the crow caws even after hearing the 
warbling of the cuckoo, is entirely due to its innate 
nature and not to its desire of vanquishing the cuckoo. 


Adh. XLVII. SL 28.] aawenfisitseara: 37 


The following notes of Mr. Chitambara Iyer relating to the 
peenomeua of nature culled from other works are requoted : 

“There will be famine as long as the course of Jupiter and 
that of Saturn lie through the end of the signs Mesha ahd Vris- 
chika and through the middle of Vrishabha and Simha. | | 

' During the period when Jupiter and Saturn occupy a single 
sign of the zodiac, there would be pestilence, cholera and death 
among the people. 

As long as Jupiter and Venus continue together in a state of 
disappearance, mankind will suffer from devils, diseases, thieves 
and enemies. 

If the course of Saturn or the retrograde motion of Mars 
should lie through the signs of Dhanus, Mesha, Vrishabha, \leena 
or Simha, there wouid be such deaths among men and animals 
that only a third of mankind, of elephants, horses, cows and other 
animals of birds and of creatures of water would survive. 

If the motion of Mars should be an accelerated one, there 
would be fear from destructive fires; if he should retrograde and 
enter another sign, the people would suffer from heat aud many 
families would suffer, and 1f his course should be through a sign 
longef than the calculated period, there would be drought in the 
land and rulers will be at war. 

lf Jupiter should retrograde or if his motion should be an 
accelerated one, and if in this state he should enter another sign, 
the rivers would not be full; the kings would lose their glory and 
suffer from diseases. | 

If Saturn should, after a lon: direct course, begin to retro- 
grade or have an accelerated motion and in this state enter another 
sign, there would be diseases, famine and drought in the land 
and vehicles will suffer destruction. 

If, when Jupiter should enter another sign when in his acce- 
lerated motion, Saiurn should be in his slow motion, Venus should 
have disappeared, and Mercury should have reappeared, the 
papain would perish. 

_ Tf Saturn, Mars and Jupiter should ‘be within sight of each 
other, men with their children would suffer from hunger and fim 
Weapons: ... 4 

a ud. 48 


378 geeditarara [Adh. XLVII. SI. 28. 


If, whilet he course of the Sun lies through ‘the end of the 
signs Vrishabha, Mithuna, Vrischika and Simha, Jupiter and Mars 
should be in conjunction with it, mankind would suffer from 
famine, and the deaths would be so many that in the cremation 
grounds of villages and towns, Pisachas might be seen with 
hundreds cf dead bodies in their mouths. 

If two, three or four planets should meet together, people would 
suffer from death anl famine. If five planets should meet, there 
would also be famine; if six, the chief ruler would run away 
from his kingdom, and if seven, humanity would come to an end. 

If the course of Mars and Saturn, through the signs of Kar.- 
kataka, Simha and Meena should be retrograde or re-retrograde, 
there would be much suffering on earth. There would also bea 
scarcity of water and wars in the land; grains would be des- 
troyed and mankind would suffer from robbers. 

If Saturn and Rahu should meet, crops would be injured; 
commodity would become scarce; husbands and wives would be 
at strife, there would be drought and famine in the land; cows 
would suffer death and men, would become exceedingly lazy. 

If the course of the Sun and the Moon, both of brilliant discs, 
should lie through the seven asterisms rom Krittika, Madhya- 
desa would suffer miseries. 

If the course of the Sun, the Moon, Marsand Venus should 
lie through the seven asterisms from Magha, there would be grief 
and disease among men and the God of Death would be busy in 
his wide work of destruction in the southern countries. 

If the course of Jupiter, the Moon and Mercury, all of brilliant 
discs, should lie through the seven asterisms from Anuradha, the 
western countries, as faras the sea, as well as the western sea 
’ itself with its creatures would suffer miseries. 

If the course of the Sun. Venus and Mars should lie through 
the seven asterisms from Sravishta, the northern countries would 
suffer miseries. If the benefic planets should appear of the colour 
of gold, the Brahmins, the Kshatriyas, the Vaisyas and the Sudras 
would all attend to their respective duties and would become 
happy." 


Thus engs the 47th Adhyaya on “ Motley Miscellany.”. 


Adh. XLVIII. Sl. 1-3]  -srereearféantsvarae 379 


GITAAT WVcll Royal Ablution. 


Ys agaiaaa: waraTagraraadeaig | 
AIA TA aT sis ala aaisat aqiafaear ue 
Sloka 1.—The king is the root of the subject-tree, 
Since the happiness and misery of the people arise in 


order from nourishing and injuring that root, it is neces- 
sary to devise means to enhance the king’s welfare, 


Al SASANT Tied: ATF BTA TT | 
at AKA TTA Ms AM ATT: TA Uh 
Sloka 2.—Now listen, Ye, to the expiation, which 
had beer expounded by the Self-born to the Precep- 


tor of Gods for the sake of Indra, and which, later, 
the Senior Garga got and imparted to sage Bhaguri. 


aut @ TTA: | 


zara fas: ard erdarar fe wheat: | 
UT HTT WH: TT TUAIM: t 

adt Gua: Besar: aa fafasars | 
TASH: FIR WATH saa T Ut 
GWAVA TTawHegagq | 
fasqardiaaaa ver zal geeata: 
da wanaiQes Tawa: FET | 

Wat AWAAISS AMAA eWaAaryz tl 
{ala RAAT: Gee AcarATTAT | 
WA AAC ATAFA Walaa tt 


gerald Ta: Haed eafaeqararearg | 
ala? We Way aaegaeaHeaa ll 


Sloka 3.—The royal astrologer and preceptor 
should give the King an ablution on a day with the 


380 aerdftaraa (Adh, XLVIII, Sl. 4:8, 


‘asterism of Pushya, There is nothing holier than this 
(bath) which puts an end to all the portents. 

MUTH AH PHVAB ATE INTTUATIa | 

AA (ok pk 2 oS “ 

HARTA aaa: Wea Ul 

THUABTERAGISaAAaaleTa TATA | 

eITTTIB IAM TAZA Ul 

Slokas 4-5,—The royal ablution should be done in 

a forest region, which is devoid of cordia, beleric myro- 
balan, thorny, pungent, bitter, and bad-smelling trees ; 
which is free from owls, vultures and such other inaus- 
Picious birds; which is full of young trees, shrubs, 
creepers and bowers, and which consists mostly of beau- 


tiful and attractive trees with unimpaired leaves and 
sprouts. 


PRUSMIMIP AR Aa TATT ATTA | 


ARMA AASATYSUTATAH NGI 

PATA TANT acKGeHlimoneaaeas | 

AGT TANTHS TANT YA II! 

Slokas 6-7.—Or, the ablution may be performed in 

a pure building in a sacred place in the vicinity of 
forests that resound with the notes of the cocks, Jeevas, 
Jeevakas, parrots, peacocks, wood-peckers, blue jays, 
green pigeons, Krakaras, Chakoras, Kapinjalas, Vanjulas 
doves, Srikantas and other birds such as the virile cuck- 
oos and bees intoxicated with the drink of haney. 


This admits of another interpretation, v7z., in the vicinity of 
such orests or in a clean building situated in a:sacred place. 


giehiaenaaiat aeanaaady wag | 
giearaay gag tetas Hikwaeg ch 


Aah, XLVIIL Sl). 9-12.) aereenfisitsear: 381 


Sloka 8.—Or, it should be performed on the attract- 
ive thighs, viz., the sandy banks that delight the“eyes 
and the heart, that have the scratches of nails, in the 
form of aquatic pus of the sportive damsels,, VUz:, 
the rivers. 


Note how the poet has brought out through metaphor Srin- 
gara (erotic) sentiment in union. 


NYIAesA HWSTHWaAWaIgIg | 


Gerclawaaa alt aseramneaayt SI 
Sloka 9.—Or, it may be done in a lake, which 
possesses the beauty of Indra, on account of its royal 
umbrella in the form of the flying swans, the fine songs 
in the form of the cries of ducks, ospreys and cranes, 
atid its eyes in the form of lily blossoms. 
MES RASTA PUETHOTANTT | 


Pr NPN 


MIFFEOSA aqaaeadiiaaiaea 11201] 


‘Sloka 10,.—Or, in a place where there are the 
sportive damsels, viz., lotus-ponds with their beaming 
faces of full-blown lotuses, melodious voices of the sweet 
notes of royal swans and breasts of the uplifted buds. 


HFAUAWAATHATTTHAACAATLAT | 
HPT SHATCMATTAT TE UL 
Sloka 11.—Or, it may be done in a cow-pen which 

is full of drops of foam caused by the cows chewing the 
cud, of cow-dung and scratches made by their hoofs; 
and which is gay with the lowing and frisking of young 
calves. 

AAT TARA SASVTATAT TIT | 

FAM YSSATS WATATATA HAT 112 Al 


382 geeafgarara, [Adh. XLVII[. Sl. 13-16, 


Pthadle + 


Sloka 12.—Or, it may be performed on the sea-shore 
which is overcrowded with ships that have arrived safely 
being laden with costly things, and whose fringes are 
variegated with white birds and fishes and the like lurk- 
ing in the thick bushes of the Nichula trees. 


gaat wa st fra: fer waned ag | 


ICC ICUCUMICCNMCICCLOOCIMIEED, 
Sloka 13.—Or, it may be done in hermitages, where 
a lion is subdued by a female deer, as anger by forgive- 
ness and where the young ones of birds and the deer 
roam about without any fear. 


PMHOI GW SATA Sea aaIaas | 
fale qiauilage seagareqaaaie eel 


Sloka 14.—Or, it may be done in a prosperous 
house where the deer-eyed ladies speak as sweetly as 
cuckoos, and have their gait impeded by the weight of 
heavy hips, girdles and anklets. 


gasqaadg a dugqaawegeay | 
CICERO CUE IC ILCIC EM MILA 
Sloka 15.—Or, it may be donein holy temples, 
rivers (Tirthas), attractive regions of gardens, in a place 
where the earth slopes down towards the east or the 


north, or where the water flows from left to right. 
aul @ TAT. | 
agate Bias adtat aR Za 
aemzsuat atu Zaaraaat war i 
A en 


aagggaiaa aa fyaTaya | 
Tt wa (as a FP aeara aA_rarg il 


AAHUCCTATS TTAB BATA | 
aitaqrntatdeieal + aera kk, 


Adh. XLVIII. Sl. 17-21.] aweraearfiattseara: 383 


gat Fat gaeat fara aga aa a farsa | 
AAMAMASTAT TAMAS AAT AZ 1291 
Slokas 16-17,—It is auspicious when the ablution ts 

performed in a place where the ground is free from ashes, 
charcoal, bones, sandy mud, husk, hair, pits, burrows of 
crabs as well as from burrow-dwelling animals, rat-holes 
and ant-hills. The patch of earth which is hard (not 
hollow), sweet-smelling, glossy (not arid), sweet and 
even (without ups and downs), augurs victory. The 
same holds good in the case of encampment of armies as 
well, according to circumstances. 

HET GUA CATAAIUAB: ASAT | 

maa AT HEAT Ales Haliairarat ar uri 

BIMAIMSIAs AIA: ANA? Geiteas Farge 

Hasray AeaMa_ grain ages: eu 

Slokas I8-19.—The astrologer, minister and sacrifi- 

cial priest should set out of the city at night and offer 
libations (oblations) in- the east, north or north-east. 
Then, the pure priest devoutly performs the Avahana 
(infusion ceremony) with fried grains, coloured rice, 
curds and flowers ; and the hymn prescribed for that by 
the sages is the following : 


AMI TU ad asa TarkyaIn: | 
feat ate Bara % arcaedsaafira: Rell 
MUA Tas Balad TNeGTear | 
Qs UT AT BAiea seat Atiea Bela: 11220) 
Slokas 20-21.—* May all Gods who wish to be 
honoured with worship come here as well: as the others 


wa., quarters, serpents, sages and others that partake of 
the sacrificial offerings !’’ The priest after calling upon 


384 geeateararg: [Adh, XLVIII. 22.23, 


and infusing the deities (into their images) should address 
all of them thus: “ You will go back tomorrow after re. 
ceiving worship and conferring prosperity on the King.” 
maeay Heat cat at aad waza | 
AAA AA WATT AAAI! NAM 
Sloka 22.—After worshipping the infused deities, 
they should spend the night therein order to ascertain 
the good or bad nature of the future revealed by dreams, 
the rules pertaining to which have been dealt with in my 
work ‘ Yatra’. 
ATU A AAA | 
THVUYMIAMTACT: Gareacaqgiredrsa: | 
adaamnagiaya faraaa aiawarey 
BRAT AFACY BUI Ara aut wa aenarara | 
gia palmmaval SeaaraRaaaies 
aratt agaiay aragedt Karvara Rrra Rata: | 
GMAT WIRSUAMAAWMA TTA BAN tl 
UMA Aid Tawar yes aqaaiag | 
Begawan cacd aigta arg 
MA: Usa AAA VAlA awaaA BI 
amare fawara eacaiaras aa: 
aTaT Zaza YOUTTAEA | 
ZEAE AATasT CAN CaqcAR TWeray tl 
geaeay aa: eeeat fram By_iaAy | 
arauat eam Fal Graal ZI: ti 
geared Sree ga: waa: | 
fagred agate et Ba ar wig asyvq 


aise ward aeaaatadtegry 1 
Tata Braeaeay AAAI ue 


. Sloka,. 28. —-On the morrow, at dawn, the materials 
possessing. ‘the prescribed. qualities are-to. be, offered on 


Adh. XLVIII. SI. 24-30.] sereenf{eitseata: 398 


the earth, and the following are the verses enunciated by 
the ancient sage on this subject. 


amapcaniver eeraay afeaiy | 

Tae RTT rather Fara sz Uw 

Guea werd a FATT BUT FITZ 

arqaicaraaa gaia fata Aeadq ues 

meta aaaaT Vala ae AlaiA: | 

wae egy Aaa a seta awa: N28 

AMAA Heat Taateagyoieaa: | 

AMS TASS TIA VagAsIAa? oil 

aes AAS: Haqette | 

qa AANA: gueaitaaniee rei 

Slokas 24-28.—In that place, a circle should be 

drawn by the priest and filled with varieties of gems, 
and places kept apart for worshipping the different dei- 
ties, vzz-, Serpents, Yakshas, Gods, Manes, Gandharwas, 
Nymphs, Sages and Siddhas. The learned priest should 
draw with various coloured powders the figures of the 
planets with all the stars, Rudras, the Mothers (7 in 
number), Skanda, Vishnu, Visakha, the protectors of the 
quarters and divine ladies, and duly worship them with 
perfumes, garlands, scented paste, eatables and food of 
various kinds and varieties of roots, fruits and meat and 
attractive drinks such as toddy, milk and wine. 


BINA WAS TNAAeag Saag | 
TEAR A: Areal Patent a Rasa NAV 
aialzaneia:s Raraeaaaciaa Gar | 


AaMasnss: fait atalzaatl uZo4| 
¥. d- 49 


806 ae@teraa (Adh. XLVI 31. 31-48. 


CAIQAQIIRAN Tay YrAIITA: | 
AVBARAAZT AWea gay va 
TUSaryRegea gary Teas Ta 
Tegal weeds G_TEY 112M 
Jetta aatianse: Gat cate ating 
afaaraararangmeagnraiana uaz 


Slokas 29-33.—Now | shall explain the mode of 
worshipping ‘the deities drawn in the circle. As for 
the planets, the same method as given in the ata in con- 
nection with planetary sacrifices should be followed. The 
Danavas, Daityas and Pisachas are to be worshipped 
with flesh, rice, liquor, etc.; the Manes with ‘oil bath, 
collyrium, sesamum, meat and rice; the sages with 
hymns from Sama, Yajus and Rig Vedas, perfumes, in- 
cense and garlands ; the serpents with unmixed colours 
and the triple sweet—honey, ghee and sugar; the Gods 
with incense, ghee, oblations, garlands, gems, invocations 
and salutations; the Gandharwas and the nymphs with 
fine perfumes and sweet-smelling garlands; the remain- 
ing deities with multi-coloured offerings. All the deities 
should be worshipped and also strings dipped in saffron- 
paste, cloths, flags, ornaments and sacred threads should 
be placed in their respective compartments. 


awrn—ararai agay aaralaimaaalaa: | 
qrenftiat aha SagaTal aM TE FI 
MBNA TA APN CH WIA: Teryeant ti 
arsadiiamersgary atrergq gra dtsafate: | 
APS TS ANISNAULETH STITT | i 
visitaretavat Rizal zitoufkarieea: | 

Far qraewsatt erase wg tea— gly y 


Adh. XLVIII. Sl, 34-38] wersenfteitseara: 389: 


WSs Heart saasaa tay! 
Maqeacany Taq salaTag svi 
wiaeTgaaea gate TeagaTa qu | 
TWeraBmasr aqaagquin >a sana ual 
TATA WTA FT TT AMIN Gey araids | 
qWaaiat tat gaiq@aa ar sat 24 


Slokas 84-36.—To the west or the south of the 
circle, fire.should be kindled on the sacrificial altag and 
all the necessary materials collected as well as. long blades 
of Darbha grass that have passed their sprouting stage ; 
and fried grains, ghee, coloured rice, curd, honey, white 
mustard seeds, perfumes, flowers, incense, yellow orpi- 
ment, collyrium, sesamum and sweet fruits of the season. 
On the circle should be placed earthen plates filled with 
ghee and Payasa and with these materials, worship 
should be done on the western altar, as this is the one. 
recommended for the royal ablution. 


TIM Brg ery Hoary Mawrasaniag | 

aaitaqBTH salary SeTaaeT [RH 

IAAT ANITIAETAT AAT | 

TIAMAT TTA NI 

Slokas 37-38.—And in the four corners of the altar 

should be placed strong pots with white strings tied round 
their necks, and sprouts of milky trees and fruits on 
their mouths. They should be filled with watex con- 
taining the herbs prescribed for the ablution, and. gems 
and then the materials for the ablution enumerated 


by Sage Garga as hereunder (vide next two Slokas), 
should be collected. 


888: qeeafearara [Adh. XLVIII. Si. 39-44. 


aut @ Wii: 
SCUCATRA WHAT ATTA | 
qaraaivaniaaceaaeatsa: 
THAGATIAM HEY TAAeaa: | 
Qraataa aq war Adatge:—zZiy tt 
SAifasadl AAAI | 
sat Rata ast angi raat Tat 330 
wat 3 aeadt 3 qalat waa | 
aRet fat act ag gratg Aeaaz Uvoll 
arafl garast Sa addins araaty | 
ARCA AIS TATATATAAT 1182 I 
wala canary frei a aaa | 
TAMAVEAMIEAN ws aFala J Uva 
Slokas 39-42.—The Jyotishmatee (a kind of herb 
known in Tamil as «rgie5o%), Trayamana (a herb), 
Haritaki(s@ésrw), Samee, (Qsideu) Jeevantee, Viswe- 
swaree, Patha, red madder, Vacha (a1) Saha, Saha- 
devee, Poornakosa, Satavaree, Arishtika, Siva (s@ 
Qs64), Bhadra, Bramhee (Gu1er @warenfl), Kshema, Aja, 
all kinds of seeds, Kanchanee, all auspicious things (such 
as curds, coloured rice and flowers) as far as available, 
all herbs, juices ofdifferent tastes, gems, all perfumes, 
Bilva and Vikankata fruits, herbs bearing auspicious 


names, gold and auspicious materials —all ee are to 
be put into the several pots. 


MAALLAN ATA UTA | 
TIRSINTa Ihara lie 
Ta WS Wa a Weagay | 
faery gett Gia FIT TTT VV 


Adh XLVIII. SI]. 45-49,] weraearfattsvarz: 389° 


aeartana Tale Tat Fag | 
Ba aed aeay aah Prarat esl 
Slokas 43.45. - At first, the skin of a bull bearing 
auspicious marks, which had died after full age should be 
spread on the altar with the neck turned to the east. 
Over this, should be placed a red and unimpaired skin of 
a fighting bull. Over this isto be spread a lion’s skin, 
and over that, a tiger’s. This is to be done inan aus- 
picious Muhurta when the Moon is on the star Pushya. 
AAA HAAA BR BABtATATAITY | 
aivaemiad at feat aaorgate esi: 
A ba as Ct 
ATIAAesa sa: TaisRsawHg | 
qsleRareaiacarasahtat ZAT! V9! 
Slokas 46-47.—The throne made of gold, silver or 
copper or of any milky tree is to be placed on the afore- 
said skins. If its height is one cubit, one and a quarter, 
and one and a half cubits, it will prove beneficial to 
rulers of states, conquerors of neighbouring kingdoms and 
those who wish to bring the whole earth under their 
sway respectively. 
Maas Rws sways Tara: | 
afrarqgieacateReaTaaga: Vl 
apamateaa: sgegoareaairaie: | 
AaTRINTAHoUsteTast Vs 
Slokas 48-49.—Having placed gold on the throne 
(having put some gold inside the throne), the King 
should sit on it with a happy mind, in the company of 
his ministers, trustworthy friends, preceptors, astrologers, 
citizens, and those having auspicious names; and with 
bards, townsmen and Brahmins shouting and chanting 


390 graitaaa [Adh. XLVIIIL. Sh 50-54 


in achorus the Punyaha hymn andthe Vedas; and 
all evils warded. off through the auspicious sounds of 
tabors, conchs and other musical instruments. 


Heaalaaiad giiea: Hrqda assre | 
Sates Beas altar wh: Welt 
Sloka 50.—Then the preceptor should anoint the 
King who is cladin fresh (unwashed) silken garments, 
and who has offered oblations and worship to the deities, 


with ghee contained in pots after covering him with 
a blanket. 


aerastaarerd ait seaitany | 
aes qarawad a yeasyT ghana: Whe 
Sloka 51.—The number of holy pots to be used is 
eight or twenty eight ora hundred and eight. The 
greater the number of pots consecrated, the greater will 
be the efficacy. The following is the hymn composed 
by the: Senior Garga for the anointing ceremony. 


ast Iai! agtenisd Tita qq | 

mIs4 GUATATETE AST BR MIABAL UAW 

Aaa et ar ae ReTTATTAT | 

ad qasadergig AMTGITTTY | 

Slokas 52-53,—Consecrated ghee’ has beep. men. 

tioned as power (splendour); it is the best dispeller of 
sins; it is the food of tne Gods; on it are established 
al] the worlds. Whatever sin - terrestrial, atmospheric or 


celestial—has befallen you, may all that melt away by 
your contact with this sanctified ghee.” 


Serena Ta: aeTATeT A THAT | 
aURaergaeR gUaSAT TA MEH 


Aedh, XVII. SI. 55-65.) seraeantztrsvara: ‘361 


Sloka 54.—Then, the royal priest should remove 
the blanket and bathe the king with the ‘‘ Waters of the 
Royal Abhition”’ containing fruits and flowers, reciting 
the following hymns: 


quectaataed 4 a en quaat | 
HA (YA CLA AAA AASAT 144M 
mize aaa eat aera a fad | 
aeaerara Fare fares ateat 4s 
aifisenidia: aftr Relat geet | 
aga gal aa flaar aga F loll 
ATTY Al ABT TANTAT Ta J | 
aaterataacg Reqracawai am Wei 
ATA BAA TAAITATTT: | 

Aaa (aTA BI RY AT sar Sil 
aa watts Boa Bar: | 

Uy Wes FT Yaa ATATITATT Foil 
afysaasiaiaated ata aaa: | 
Vaawls VLAN AAAs ATE? AT NG 2 
aitay agra aia Pegeqeat | 
Farrar aera (at FeraaeT FFA 
AAA ATA wrenaa ala a | 
MiPada: Goes Fores RawlHe: Gs 
YT TACHA AATHSY Tacaa: | 
aaldaa Faq BANA ATT Vil 
wnay fata Bat sraisasagy | 

qatar Gieelal Was SUVA: SH 


$92  @eedeatara (Adh. XLVIIT. 66-70. 


aiseeay Adan: Gada Aga | 

HAS ATURIAT SATAITAS TTT SAU 
Raaal Aawmial Satta: Aetge: | 
qaaTATA ABA Qoarearaaana + lgvil 
aaiqiaeasaa mal Aaa ara | 
aealta a feast aastarsarat: (geil 
aaa: Rate siqa: @ Rat Taq | 
Ot Bey | aa goqastdar: BAe Sit 
alaecaratatieaeg aaicarataraant: | 
qanahsl araadgieaataa: loll 


Slokas 55-70.—May the Gods bathe you, and the 
ancient Siddhas, Brahman, Vishnu, Rudra, Sadhyas, 
groups of Maruts, the Suns, Vasus, Rudras, the great 
celestial physicians, Aditi, the mother of the Gods, Svaha, 
Siddhi, Saraswati, Kirti, Lakshmi, Dhriti, Sree, Sineevali, 
Kuhu, Danu, Surasa, Vinata, Kadru, the consoris of Gods 
that have not been mentioned so far, and also mothers 
of Gods, may all these bathe you! The groups of divine 
nymphs, the stars, Muhurtas, Fortnights, Days, Nights, 
the three junctions, Years, the lords of Day (the Sun and 
other planets), Minutes, Seconds Moments, Lavas (the 
sixth part of a twinkling), all these, and other auspicious 
divisions of Time, may they bathe you! Sages engaged 
in the propogation of the Vedas, and hermits with their 
wives and disciples bathe you! The Vaimanikas (owners 
of aerial chariots), groups of Gods, Manus, Oceans 
Rivers, the great Serpents, Kimpurushas, Vaikhanasas, 
the great Brahmins, Vaihayasas, the seven seers with 
their wives, the. Fixed Places,. Marichi, Atri, Pulaha, 


Adh. XLVIII. Sl. 71-73.) seracqitatseqsa: 898 - 


Pulasthya, Kratu, Angiras, Bhrigu, Sanatkumara, Sanaka, 
Sanandana, Sanatana, Daksha, Jaigeeshavya, Bhagan- 
dara, Ekata, Dwita, Trita, Jabali, Kasyapa, Durvasas, 
Durvineeta, Kanwa, Katyayana, Markandeya, Deergha- 
tapas, Sunassepha, Viduratha, Urva, Samvarthaka, Chya- 
vana, Atri, Parasara, Dwaipayana, Yavakreeta, Deva- 
raja and his younger brother, Mountains, Trees, Creep. 
ers, Holy places, Prajapati, Diti, Cows, the Mothers of 
the Universe, Divine Vehicles, all the Worlds, the Moving 
and Stationary Beings, Fires, Manes, Stars, -Cloads, Sky, 
Quarters, Water, these and many others of auspicious 
names bathe you with holy waters that destroy all the 
portents, just as Indra was anointed by all these with 
a happy mind ! 


AGATA CTATRSATTSd? ASLAN: | 
RUSHMSHS TST HATTL? ABST AT M9 2il 
Sloka ?71.—With these hymns and others prescribed 
in the books on rituals belongmy to the Atharva Veda, 
Rudragana (11 Anuvakas), Kausmanda (six anuvakas), 


Maharauhina, Kubera Hridaya and the Samriddhi Rik,. 
the above anointing ceremony should be done. 


mieaaateeaaiia qaaastay | 
Haare faarcarar aera: 9 
Sloka 72.—After a bath, the King should weara 
pair of cotton cloths, sanctified by the three verses of the 
hymn commencing with safest and by the four be- 
ginning with fevsaani. 
QUIS ISAM ATASTATy SAT SAMA | 


STAM a FI VI AR tl were 
gz zd. 50 


394 geeaitarara [Adh, XLVIII. Sl. 74-78. 


Sloka 78,— Then the King sipping water, while the 
sounds of conchs and chanting of Punyaha hymns flou- 
rish, should worship Gods, Preceptors, Brahmins, his 
royal umbrella, banner and weapons and lastly his own 
guardian deity (or his usual worship to be done). 


MIT TA TATU ATT: | 
aad asia aa feenzagiez lov 
Sloka 74,—Then the King should wear new orna- 

ments conducive to victory, sanctified by the verses 
ayss, aI, TACIT, etc, 

Tea fealaadt agahraraaant ast | 

~ A -¢ Co se ~ 

aunt aq BATT azar 94H 

TIA VAIS Wy WI F | 

AUG Mea sa aa: WT M94 


Slokas 75-76.—Going to the second sacrificial altar, 
the King should sit on the skins which are to be placed 
one over another in this manner—first, the skin of a 
bull is placed, over this, that of a cat, over this, that 
of an antelope, over this, that of a spotted deer, over 
these, the lion’s, and lastly, the tiger's over thern. 


HCI FEAT Geass atataegate: | 
PATAIHITETN AA TINA AMARA 1991 | 
Sloka 77.—In the chief place (right side), the priest 
should make offeringsiof sacrificial twigs, sésamum, ghee, 
€tc.,into the fire with hymns addressed to Siva, indra, 
Brihaspati, Narayana and Vayu. 
Raa aaah catagCaT | 


STUsTTAANy Wika: ssisrag ech 


Adh. XLVIII. Sh. 79-81.) sterqeariteriseara; 395 


a 


Sloka 78.-The astrologer should tell the auguries,. 
of Fire, explained in the chapter on‘ Indra’s Banner’ 
(Adh, XLIII. P. 324, Supra), The priest having finished 
all the rites, should recite the following with folded 
palms : 


Tet TAMT Aa GaAs TWyarg | 
aise cat ¢ Agel qawaaara FSi 
Sloka 79.—“ May all the groups of Gods depart and 
come back on another occasion, having now received 


worship at the hands of the King, and bestowed great 
success on him”, 


TUNA sag Jeled aarsadgra: | 
aeatg afotangy anid onbaradty ict! 
Sloka 80.—The King then should honour the astro- 
loger, priest and others worthy of Dakshina such as 
Vedic scholars, with large gifts of money according to 
their merits. 
aU B Wit: 
aear fat TiQIsar arat SaqesRar: | 
ates qa agi ea arama a_aTAT 
mpaniaageiars wage: | 
AIMasy aal watt Alaa: alatiza: u 
MASTiaeSse: Ranaaafy art 
NATTA VAF: Warszawwgyt: WA: tl 
qimigeidgaarsrara qa: | 
SCAISHT WHAMIT AAA Asa Gq | 
THAMG HAgrIAATHAT Ne 2h 
Sloka 81.—The King should please his subjects (by 
a proclamation to the effect of protecting them against 
all.odds), release the animals from the hands of butchers, , 


398. ' geeatgetata [Adh. XLVIIL Si. 82:85, 


and'order a general amnesty to prisoners except those 
that threaten the internal peace of the country. 

CAAISIA MAW BaaTsagyacy | 

TSqSAaHsel Nel gies: We WRT Ne 

Sloka 82.—Should the King perform this ceremony 

every time the Moon isin Pushya, he would get increased 
happiness, fame and wealth. If it be performed at any 
other time, it would yield only half the benefits men- 
tioned. For, the expiatory ceremony done during the 
Full Moon in the month of Pushya is declared to be the 
foremost. 


UdieaA ITH Tal: Bay TAA | 
WANA VT FOIA TAAL NR 
Sloka 83.—The royal ablution should be performed 
when a kingdom is afflicted with portents and disasters 
(like epidemics), when thereis an eclipse, when Ketu is 
sighted and when there is a planetary war. 
Tike GH A FATA Al Tea aT Beaia | 
HRS AT aAthea TeMgiaitsra icv 
Sloka 84.—There is no portent in the world that is 
not remedied by this ; and there is no auspicious rite that 
surpasses this ceremony. 
aa Saas 
Asqsao at war wate ATs | 
aa Usa alata aeat F aeaat Bia 
MAUSAAA TT FATA FT BPA! | 
eC ARS APS 
aqaaare @ ATT AAA Cdl 
Sloka 85.—This ceremony is highly commendable 
at aking's coronation, wher he aspires for the’ sove- 
teigmty-over an empire and longs for the birth of a son. 


XLVI. 86-87; XLIX: 1-3] teravanaiisearas 307 


HEATUAS TECH TEeTLa | 
MAUL AMIACATAV AR TW UC 
Sloka 86.~For the sake of Indra, Brihaspati of 
great renown taught this Ablution, which confers unique 
longevity, increase of offspring and happiness. 
aaaa Raat sey STITT: | 
Tara wi Rigaacgatg licolt 
Sloka 87.—The King who afterwards bathes his 
horses and elephants in the same manner, will'see them 
free from illness and attain great success. 


Thus ends the 48th Adhyaya on ™ Royal Ablution. ” 


ree 


TsaTT WeSii Royal Crowns: 


aca fee stat Sat TAATaS 
RAR May WAIST TROTAATTA! U2 
Sloka I.—In this chapter, I am giving a summary 
containing all the ideas of the characteristics of royal 
diadems that have been treated of at length by the 
ancient seers (such as Kasyapa). 


GS: TAR Cat aeaseragerie Prefer: | 
aq avexaecan Te gausae ies: uae 
AAS: Ts Varcatahs Tey | 

2 4 TaIeag? Gad aAllaan sen uz 


Slokas 2-3.—The crown of a King, should, to be 
auspicious, have an expansion of eight digits in’' the 


398 _ Geeertarary, (Adh, XLIX. Sl. 4-7. 


middle; that of the queen, of seven digits; that of the 
Yuvaraja, of six ; that of the commander of the army, of 
four; and that of the royal protege, of two digits. These 
are the five kinds of crowns that have been mentioned. 


aa fsa ara wea Tae | 
ai TF Yana waa Tet Vl 
Sloka 4.—All these crowns must have a length 
double their respective expansion, while the expansion on 
the sides is half that of the middle. All these made of 
pure gold increase prosperity and happiness. 


qatiet yfivafataar garsaiiaagea: 

waa: Bawa: aarqaat at aar i 
Sloka 5.—A royal crown has five crests ; that of the 
Yuvaraja and the Queen, three; that of the commander, 


only one; and that of the royal protege is without any 
crest. 


fran ae at gaa Faala sea | 
afeaatt yfirtea sat 4 gaarag Hg 
Sloka 6.—When the gold sheet for the crown ex- 
pands easily while it is being prepared, it augurs pros- 


perity and victory tothe King and great apn te 
the subjects. 


eiftausatard saa ax aU: Agere: | 
HEY WBacasa AnH Waal: wea: holt 
Sloka 7.—A dent or hole in the middle of the 
crown, when it is under preparation, produces loss of life 
and kingdom. If it breaks in the middle, it should be 


discarded. One that breaks in the sides produces 
obstacles, | 


XLIX. 8, L. 1-3.] Twaraisvara: . 399° 


ferart war get avy eget free | 
aa GAT AiG wey ar seleTaz 
GSAT TAMNLY FHT a earagy | 
GSi ana a swat aes aaa 
agareacra area: weaaieaga | 
Talat Tl Was wat lich 
Sloka 8.—At the appearance of evil symptoms, a 
man learned in this science should prescribe expiatory 
rites to the king. A crown attended with commendable 
signs tends to the prosperity of the King as well as of 
the kingdom. 
Thus ends the 49th Adhyaya on ‘‘ Royal Crowns, ” 


VS SITy 'xell Signs of Swords. 
ARSTTAGIA GA: ARIAT: TE! 
AFSAASHA aotisgal Fata | U2 

Sloka 1.—A sword of the best type measures fifty 
inches, while one of the smallest type, twenty five. A 


dent in an odd inch in the measurement of the sword is 
to be considered as foreboding evil. 


— Pqataaararaateygearssaray | 


MEA AN WARM saa qQaaaaad FT Ueil 
Sloka 2-—Dents resembling in shape .a Bilva tree, 
Vardhamana figure, umbrella, Siva’s emblem, ear-ring, 
lotus, flag, weapon and Swastika mark are auspicious. 


PRVAR RSH AUMCHACIATR HAI: | 
Be AM A BART FaTMA sTYATA U2 


400 qeedigarara, = (Adh..L. Sl. 4-7, 


Sloka 8—The dents resembling a lizard, crow, 
heron, carcass-eating bird, truncated body and scorpion 
and many dents inthe ‘upper part of the sword are not 
auspicious, 


Wicd kar Hes! AVS aA TaAIsgAA | 
Raat a Biase: MHA ws: ll 
Sloka 4.—A sword that has a breach, is too short, 
blunt, cut atthe top, not appealing to the eye and the 
mind, and without resonance betokens misery ; whereas 


one with characteristics contrary to the above will yield 
good results. 


Bre ATLA WAIT Tada BA | 


magni ag safea sat wast @E Ul 
Sloka 5.—The sounding of a sword by itself fore- 
bodes the owner's death ;.its not coming out of its sheath, 
defeat : its coming out ,of the sheath by itself indicates 
war ; and its blazing leads to victory. 


Ta ayaa ass 
WI IA Ata TART FEA | 
ta aq Tea HuAG waaay 
SO MCCERCINCBICE MILE] 
Sloka 6.—The King should not unsheath the sword 
without any reason, nor brandish it, nor see his own face 


in it, nor mention its price, nor tell the place of its origin, 
hor ‘measure. it, nor, without purity, touch the blade. 


Witweaeata alsreIisazT AAT Ty | 

RANALSATPSSIT TDR Fe II) 

Sloka 7.—The best swords aré those that are shaped 
like a cow’s tongue, blue-lily petal, bambog-leaf, and 


re 


« 


Adh. L. SI. 8-10.] = aarattseara: 401 


Karaveera leaf, as well as those that have a pointed and 
round ar: 


fasaar a ssa faa: eit THINTH Ut: | 
ys Baa anh saat Tamasy cit 


Sloka 8.—If a sword that has been made is too 
long, the surplus length should not be cut off, but it should 
be made to have the required length by rubbing it against 
a file. Ifit is cutat the bottom, the owner will die; 
and if at the tip, his mother. 


aut a SIgaq: | 
SIM a Gago feqat a: Tama: | 


yea ux feat azi aa ara ti 
ALATA STAT GEA aaSyAZ aa: | 
Maqeot: aHroTET: 1: erat 3 aa yar WaT 


qi AGATA AT WATT Gaze | 


aang ost Ga area Fa eBT UIRU 
Sloka 9.—An injury in a particular part of the hilt 
shows a similar one in the corresponding part of the 
sword, justas a mole onthe face of ladies does the 
existence of a similar one in their private parts. 
AAT WPA ay ws MRqawazaaa | 
BAMA Aisha ae AAT uo 
Sloka 10.—Noting the particular limb touched by 
a swordsman who questions a diviner about injuries in 
the sword, the latter should declare the injury to exist in 
the particular part of the sword kept in the sheath, by 
understanding the following rules thereon. 

To find out if there are dents at all on the sword, one should 
find out the Lagna at the time: if there are malefics in the 
Kendras, surely there will be sone flaw in the sword. 

- ocr) | 


402 . geeaigararg =f Adh. L. Sl. 11-15, 


PUA WE TASES Bats wacaeas | 

qaey a gala ay we aqy Fee 

TASK serrata TWAT: | 

SUT AITAMANGA BITUAT UV 

MACTATTHA AA FT ATSTTAY sat: | 

aye Beat Ta AHranFaaas 22 

Cae % ica bbe Now 

BULA MUTT AAMT | 

Wg a aaa wera wala a evil 

THATS YVR TW Ws aTRsieals J | 

”~ an 4 
Vg miaaraaerag Fat TTT U4 
Slokas 11-15.—When the querist touches his head, 

the dent or injury will be in the first digit of the sword ; 
when the forehead, in the second; when the space be. 
tween the brows, in the third; whenan eye, in the 
fourth; when the noss, in the fifth; when the lip, in 
the sixth; when the cheek, in the seventh; when the 
chin, in the eighth; when the ear, in the ninth; when 
the neck, in the tenth; when the shoulder, inthe ele- 
venth ; when the chest, in the twelfth; when the arm- 
pits, in the thirteenth ; when the breast, heart, stomach, 
abdomen and navel, in the fourteenth, fifteenth, six- 
teenth, seventeenth and eighteenth respectively; when 
the bottom of the navel, in the nineteenth ; when the hips, 
in the twentieth ; when the private parts, in the twenty- 
first; when the thighs, in the twenty second; when be- 
tween the thighs, in the twenty-third; when the knee, 
in the twenty-fourth; when the shank, in the twenty- 
fifth ; when between the shanks, ankles, heels, foot and 
toes, in the: twenty.sixth, twenty-seventh, twenty-eighth, 


Adh. L. SI. 16-19.] TMT Tisearay: 403 


twenty-ninth and thirtieth respectively, according to the 
authority of sage Garga. 

AUG Wa: | 

fag ewe Yat AanMsTssA | 

CAMA AAT Dial Coral aT STH tt 

Bat RKsaal + auarysya a | 

eagrencs a wIgae aaa: ti 

YER WM AIT AF SIA FAT | 

qarenaie agsia AT AMUFS AZT tl 


GANTT VATAAARa: ALITA Ty I 
° ¢ e , 
CRTMTA TAM: Te PCA: 12K li 
Qisia: Boel shaseqa: gaavrszasway | 
RAT Aaraaaaaaagana wrsly 11 
spagiagqiasaal aa aigacqaitaia: | 
HUA TAABAT arg (2c 
’ anal sara aeqaeaisacayz | 
VYAGUSAA FT MAURTTAa WaT 2AM 
Slokas 16-19.—The effects that have to be predicted 
of the dents in the first five digits of the sword are seve- 
rally, death of sons, acquisition of wealth, loss of wealth, 
all round prosperity and confinement; inthe next eight 
digits (up to 13th) severally, birth of sons, quarrel, acqui- 
sition of elephants, death of sons, incoming of wealth, 
death, acquisition of wives and mental affliction: in the 
next eight ( from 14th to 21st) severally, (14) acquisition 
of wealth, (15) loss of money, (16) acquisition of women, 
(17) death, (18) increase of wealth, happiness, etc., (19) 
death, (20) happiness and (21) loss of money; and ‘in 
the last nine (21 to 30), they are respectively (22) getting 


404 qeealigaraig [Adh. L. Sl. 20-22. 


money, (23) death, without salvation, (24) obtaining of 
wealth, (25) death, (26) prosperity, (27) penury, (28) 
lordship, (29) death and (30) kingdom. 
qual a agas eaaqentta wgTaKst: | 
aanan weeqacaaisateta aad URoll 
Sloka 20.—lf there be defects beyond the thirtieth 
digit, the effects thereof are negligible; but in the odd 
and even digits, they prove auspicious and harmful respec- 
tively ; ; while according to some sages (e. g. Parasara) 
the injuries beyond the thirtieth inch up to the end bave 
no effects whatsoever. 
AUT ST TT: | 
AFA BQ GANAETATA: aE Sea | 
aaa fase: araeaey acqa: ta: I 
Fraargeaen at am: ashes: BZA: | 
Baz.. SHE SITY REAM HEIs Wa: 
rarararg tena sengra GS Az | 
Vsagyst 3 Hal TN ALWHSAT: 
HCA CTSTART TAP TAFT ATTHATE Ts | 
) 
PAA MYTTFAACATET NAL 
RUAATGTHARIIT AIT Aas Teg | 
ATRABATAN TINVATGHE URI 
Slokas 21-22,— A sword having the smell of the Kara- 
veera flower, the blue-lily, elephant’s ichor, ghee, saffron, 
round jasmine or Champaka, indicates prosperity, where- 
as one with the smell of cow’s urine, salt or fat bodes 
evil. Similarly, one with the smell of tortoise, marrow, 
blood or salt produces danger and misery, and one with 


the lustre of beryl, gold or lightning leads to victory, 
‘health and prosperity. 


Adh. L. Sl. 23-26.) Qaraitsearay: 405 
ba bs eo. ~s ~~ ‘an a 
SEMI -F VAT Va HaH=sa? Aaiary | 
BAU TNAQaltaiean: assaawesag AZ VN 
aeATH YSN aie qa aAiasaaley | 
MUTI AAIA BeAeszTa Tasads Vill 
Slokas 23-24.—The following are the drinks pre- 
scribed by sage Usanas for the sword: one wishing for 
very great wealth should give a drink of blood by the 
sword ; for begetting a virtuous son, a drink of ghee; 
for inexhaustible wealth, one of water; for the acquisi- 
tion of money by sinful means, one of the milk of 
mare, camel or elephant; and for cutting the trunks 
of elephants, one of fish-bile, deer-milk, horse-milk, and 
goat-milk, mixed with the toddy of palm trees. 


CIR CIECICEIUC LIE E Ly 
AMUIMGISTA F Fat TST | 
Aaa aATT adisel alt 
" gaara a em wast: eel 
Sloka 25.—A sword rubbed with gingelly oil and 
then smeared with an unguent prepared with the milky 
Juice of Arka plant, the cleaned powder of goat’s horn and 
the excreta of doves and mice must be given any of the 
drinks mentioned in the previous two verses, and after- 
wards whetted; such a sword will not break against stones. 


at KIM ayed gw aia wassqNaT aq | 
areas fad areaia tia ag a ITTY TE Hleary 
Sloka 26.—An iron weapon treated witha day-old 
drink made of the burnt powder of plantains ‘(or its rib) 
mixed with butter-milk, and then sharpened properly, 
will not break on stones, nor become blunt: on | other iron 


instruments, 
Thus ends the 50th Adhyaya on! ‘Signs of Swords." «7! 


406 «  qeeaigaranyz (Adh. LI. 1-2. 


AFA Wil Prediction through Limbs. 


This chapter is probably spurious. So says Bhattotpala.. 
But it will be seen that the author has himself referred to this 
subject, vf2z, Anga Vidya, in Adhyaya II supra (P.15,lines 2, 3). 


AA e ls 
qaqa BUAA enerenaneanalaar 
USE WATTS ASTI HIS AAT | 
NN A ~~ 
aagt & awaueTHaasat aaeai Ag- 
ASSIA BAIYARS TAIT |i 
Sloka 1.—An astrologer should predict good and 
bad effects on observing carefully the direction, speech 
place and articles brought at the time, also taking into 
consideration the behaviour of thekimbs of the questioner 
with reference to himself or to another person and the 
particular time of his query. For, Time which is Om- 
niscient, All-powerful, and All-seeing, on account of its 
being the Soul (sustainer) of all beings—moveahle and 
stationary—shows good and bad effects through the 
bodily movements and utterances of the querists. 


ma gaaelaynayataragaeset- 
ATA TAIAAAAAT ES AITS TAY | 
tafiieaagagiass agquaailad 
AAMRAASAMATSIS TASTY [12 
Sloha 2.—The place favourable for a query is one 
which is even (without depressions and . elevations), 
covered with the shade of trees that smile with flowers, 
are laden with fruits, have glossy barks and leaves, are 
devoid of ill-omened birds and bear auspicious names, 


which is the abode of Gods, sages, Brahmins, virtuous 
men and Siddhas, which is endowed with fragrant 


Adh. LI. SI. 3-6.] QeTaNMaIsvaTe: 407 


erst, p Ae emmmpeatingseianiys | “RSUPTUNATg pate SONS AIL AAR ai dil path nen se 


eel 


flowers and crops, which pleases the heart through the 
limpidity of its sweet water and which is covered with 
beautiful green grass. 


fSatwagtaanekygseargesa AHA! | 
PUTA TATA: ZRATTTIT TAA UU 


| Sloka 3.—Inauspicious is a place abounding in trees 
which are cut, split, worm-eaten, thorny, scorched, coarse, 
crooked, inhabited by ill-omened birds, bearing censu- 
rable names and having many withered leaves and _ barks 
fallen. 


WMAP Nad As aqsaais Aw azrar7z | 
~~ e A ¢ 
AACHUFLSUSAMAAT FU WRIT TAIT Vil 
Sloka 4.—Equally inauspicious is a place such as 
the burial ground, a desolate shrine, a place where four 
roads meet, one that does not appeal! to the heart, rugged 


ground, a sandy place, one that is covered with rubbish, 
charcoal, potsherds, ashes, husks and dry grass. 


HAMAAAANGA ATTA AAA ATT: | 
Con ALAN “ N 
Prarafatitedeqgaesdlsieta Wa U4 
Sloka 5.—Similarly unfavourabie will be places that 
are occupied by ascetics, naked persons, barbers, enemies, 
butchers, dog-eaters, gamblers, hermits, sick persons as 
well as a prison, armoury, apiary or shops where honey‘ 
is sold. 
MYA RA WIM AA TAAT_AMNAT: | 
C a os ¢ iN = 
qalgBiastet Ba A Wal AeqMTs TAHASITAT Sl! 
Sloka 6.—The best directions for a query are the 


East, North and Northeast ; North-west, West, South 
and: South-east and Seth eet are unfavourable for the 


408 geesitarar = [Adh. LI. SI. 7-10. 


querist. The morning time is beneficial, while the night 
and the two twilights and the afternoon are not favour- 
able. 

CH. Tete 1 

At: Gal: TaAKaea Gale eresara | 

aqaeqags F eat g aai<ar: a 


¢ AR 


TAM fe Yarat aq aks Aira ated areaq | 
TEI GT AT MAAR aT NE? fea aitratse TH thoi 
Sloka 7.—The same good and bad effects as well as 
fore-tokens as were given in connection with the march- 
ing of asovereign (Vide sloka 12 of Ch. XLIII. supra) 
should be taken into consideration here also. The pre- 
diction may also be made by observing the articles 
brought at the time by others, what isin front of the 
querist, or what is in his hand or on his clothes. 
AUFFUSTALINUT J TAA 
as 
VA SA Wel HaITAGIESAT aq | 
qag Hata wangcaraita Gea 
faat FaMRwasatquaygeaay lici 


fHar giar faftem qritrgry we aT: TergTAT Harel | 
144 TG BAAN TAUeTal Aaah | US 
agreed | Aya sacaraTasaceeayeT | 
fatgiaena agenda SaTaMAHTA Ts UV oll 
Slokas 8-10.—The following are the masculing 
limbs: thighs, lips, breasts, testicles, feet, teeth, arms, 
hands, cheeks, hairs, throat, nails, thumbs, the frontal 


bone, armpits, shoulders, the ears, the anus and the joints, 
_ The feminine limbs are the brows, nose, buttocks, folds 


Adh.. LE. SI. 11-13.) ¢sqareradtseara; 409 


in the belly, hips, the lines on the palm, ‘fingers, the 
tongue, neck, the hind parts of the shanks, the heels, the. 
shanks, the navel, the ear-lobes, the outer-edge of the 
ear and the nape of the neck ; and the following are the 
neuter limbs: the face, back, collar bone, the knees, 
bones, the sides, the heart, the palate, the eyes, the male 
genital organ, the chest, 'the end of the spine, the head 
and forehead. If the querist should touch a limb of the 
first group, the success of the task should be achieved 
immediately ; if a limb of the second group, the success, 
will be delayed, while in the last group, it is improbable, 
Evenin the case of the limbs of the first two groups, if 
they are coarse, injured, cut or lean, success will not be 
achieved. 


TE aT ale ais Trarayshaeraa | 
a) 
agent gta: wie Pata TRA ee 
A] 

Stoka 11.—When the big toe is touched or shaken, 
the querist will suffer from eye-disease. When a finger 
is touched, trouble for his daughter will arise. When 
he strikes the head, there will be trouble from the King. 

(a Con ran iy ~ 
aaingie anaa Biz aaaT AI | 
mieaayhras KI TDITUTTUNTANAgT: 2AM 
| Slika 12.—When the querist touches the chest, he 
will suffer sepiration; leaving off his cloth from his 
body denotes the befalling of a dire ealamity. If he 


draws a piece of cloth towards himself and joins his feet 
together, he will achieve his cherished object, 


Taye Rieagt gateurserT | 
ede oat eegaee arfizal & ar ean 


q. a. 52 


410 qeedigatara (Adh. LI. Si.°14.17 


Sloka 19.—If he scratches ‘the earth with his big 
toe, his thoughts will be about lands. If he scratches the 
feet with his hand, they are about a maid servant. 


MSyAIAIsys Meaeaqneraay | 
SATMUAIa WIMSH THs FT AAIET Aeqay_ evil 
Sloka 14.—When the ‘querist is {looking at palm- 
leaves or birch-bark, his thoughts are about garments; 
when he is standing on hair, husk, bone or ashes, he _ will 


be afflicted with disease ; and when he stands on or looks 
at ropes, nets or barks, he will be imprisoned. 


on ~ ~ AD A A 

cqaiaivagrssy te WaAZETA AMETHTH? 

TeqRaag Ia weassaaITTay eT Tel 

n A . 
digeraiditssaasaqaaraeaga aay | 
feaquafadiat farga: wiPraEs: 1281 
Slokas 15-16.—If long pepper (#199), black pep- 

per, dried ginger, cyperus grass, lodhra, costus, cloth, 
water, cumin seeds, gandhamamsi, dill or Tagara be seen 
or mentioned by the querist, his thoughts will be'about a 
woman's fault, a man’s fault, a person in distress, loss of 
everything, missing of the road, loss of (children, loss of 
money, destruction of corn, son’s death, loss of bipeds 
{beasts with cloven hoofs), loss of quadrupeds and des- 
truction of lands respectively. 


AMTIAT Rae SHATTAAITM ARS: | 
TARARGOISITT THE MNFFATAUT BU? 1/2 
Sloka 17,—When the querist holds in his hand the 
fruits of Banyan tree, Madhaka, Tinduka, Jambu, Plak- 
sha, mangoes, and Jujube, he will get respectively money, 
gold, servants, iron, silken cloths, silver and copper. 


Adh: LI. SI, 18-22.] qavarereaitsvara: 41h 


aeaaeargis Hear Take STFTNTHE | 
TAMA gis wagqalagqetsaraney urcit 
Sloka 18.—Whcen he sees a vessel filled with corn 
or a pot full of water, his family will prosper. The 
sight of the dung of elephants, cows and dogs proves 
severally destructive to wealth, young ladies and friends. 


TURAN AATUVASAT Te! | 
CEE CECROUOPECIDD ECU LCICC MURAL 
Sloka 19.—When he sees a cow, elephant, buffalo, 
lotus, silver or tiger. he will obtain woollen articles, 
wealth, garments, sandal paste, silken cloths or collection 
of ornaments respectively. 
Tes TEMG aa BAT | 
EC CP ECHR ICCICECUCCAD FL (MBROL 
Sloka 20.—When the querist looks at an old Kypa- 
lika (a Saiva monk weariny skulls), his enquiry is about 
friends or gambling; when he looks at an ascetic of a 
high order, it is about a courtesan, king or woman in 
child-bed. 
x Ca CA ALA XX 
MENUS AAA ATA TT: | 
SIC CER ACIDIC LUC CESICIE MIELE] 


Sloka 21.—If he sees a Buddhist monl, a teacher, 
a Jain monk, a naked fakir, a sooth-sayer, a trader of a 
city or a fisherman, his thought concerns respectively 
a thief, the commander of army, a merchant, a female 
servant, a soldier, a shop-keeper or a condemned criminal. 


ATT MOH CS TT TATTTAT | 
ert FSHS Bessa frTAT VAN 


412  geedReree = [Adh, LI. St. 23s26-- 


Sloka 22-—When he looks at an ascetic, a toddy- 
seller or one engaged in gleaning corn, his thought is 
severally about some body who has gone abroad, tending 
cattle or one that has come to grief, 

gma ae HOT TeTeATa: AANA ATT | 
HAMTH Sta T TAMARA Fear URI 

Sloka 23.—If the querist uses the expressions, viz., 
*T should like to ask’’, ‘‘ please tell’’, ‘‘ your honour 
may see’ and ‘“‘ kindly predict ’’, his thoughts are about 
some meeting, his family, profit and lordship (authority) 
respectively. 


fatzat alee aarsast seaeq aa Read az | 


MY ATA CAT AT TAITMA FT ATAT Uv! 
Sloka 24.—If he says ‘ Predict’, he thinks of 
victory or travelling. If he says ‘ Think and tell my 
thoughts’, his thought is about a relative; and,if he 
runs to the astrologer in the midst of a crowd and tells 
“Find out quickly ”, it is about a thief. 
AUUSy Baa seal Was Te wa 
TASH BSAT alaaaisa: aq | 
HE TT was attat afadt gaara 
WAFER SAHATAT TAHT NM 
Mat Tat WH Te yraTAa | 
=\ 6 bat 
TUE Mase geredt TBA sieanigag wel 


_ Blokas 26-26.—If the questioner touches an internal 
Part of the body, the thief is one belonging or related tO 
the family ; if an external part, it is an outsider ; if a big 
toe, a man-servant; ifa toe, a maid-servant; if the 


Adh. ‘LI. S1. 27-20.) quemnereditseara: AE 


shanks, a labourer (messenger); if the navel, his own 
sister ; if the heart, his own wife; if a thumb, his son; 
if the fingers, his daughter; if he touches his stomach, 
the thief is to be found in his mother; lf the head, in his 
father (or teacher) ; and if the right and left arms, fin his 
brother and brother’s wife respectively. Thus prediction 
of theft has to be made from the touch of the limbs. 


FARAAGeA TWN Te BUI Tost: | 
SBAATHAATGA WaAHAGATE Bq IR 
BIA AATH ATA saaseagaay 
AATARBAVSHTSIST F Bera | 
gaqiaagaiaalaastaaaal- 
eQITAAAMaIa SAI A EAT NI 
Slokas 27-26—The following are the indications 
for the non-recovery of the stolen properties: The 
querist touches an external part of the body after an 
internal one ; or spits phlegm, passes urine or evacuates 
the bowels ; or drops something from his hand ; or bends 
some limb extremely and cracksit; or beholds empty 
pots carried by people or thieves; or hears ominogs words 
such as “taken away, fallen, injured, forgotten, lost, 
broken, gone, stolen, dead’’ and the like. 
fmeate aacad attra: 
ag waar Vieraat aa eizaga: | 
ATTA YSERA TS FTE 
qliag qar BRasa aera: aieat seq USI 
' Sloka 29.—All the signs mentioned above when 


odtipled with the sight of husks, bones, poison, efc., or 
with the sound ‘of weeping and sneezing (or injury Yy, 


Al4. . qeeditarar,  [Adh. LI. S1.:30-33,, 


forebode death to men attacked by illness. If the ques. 
rist touches an internal limb, belches aloud, it is to be 
guessed that he is quite happy after a sumptuous feast. 
BHELIFAVPREAASSUSMTAT | 
TUTTI Wearet Pareay @ arHY Zoi 
Sloka 80.—If he touches his fore-head or sees corn 
with thorns, it is to be inferred that he has eaten boiled 
‘fice; if he touches his breast, food consisting of aes 


corn; and if he touches, the neck, his food has been of 
barley. 


Sagasstageaa ATI: TaAaTaAa: | 
Ralead ag wear aye we Faq 132 
Sloka 31.— If he touches the abdomen, paps. stomach 
er knee, he must have eaten black gram, milk, sesamum 


er rice gruel; if he smaks or licks his lips, he must have 
tasted sweet dishes. 


faa wnicamaairs aat anag | 
aeasy aasy Raq Has eas F201 
Sloka 32.—If he strikes his tongue against the cor- 
ner of the mouth, it is to be inferred that he has eaten 
something sour; if he makes his mouth wry, something 
pungent; if he hiccoughs, something astringent; and 
if he spits, something salt. 


were gaia aged at ETS TET aT AaiaTT | 
ANT gasa WEA TOA TregwMAary aa NI 
Sioka 33.—If he spits phlegm, it is clear that he has 
eaten asmall quantity of something dry and bitter; if 
there is the sight of a carnivorous animal, something, 
mixed with meat; if he touches the brows, cheeks 


Adh. LI SI. 34-37.) qeqwteredtdtscara: est 


otlips, food consisting of bird’s meat- Thus, the signs 
for predicting food eaten have been stated. 


YAIGRITTIFBITE afer 4 ear t 
TAA AITARIMITTTMS AAA 11321! 


Sloka 34,—If the person touches the head, throat, 
hair, chin, frontal bone, ear, shank jor anus, he must 
have eaten the flesh of elephant, buffalo, sheep, hog, 
cow, hare, deer, or buffaloe’s meat mixed with others, 
in order. 


. B FAIKTAGH TIAAANAT AeA RT | 
TMT THe | aaaad aRVTIAT Bel 


Sloka 35.— When an evil omen is seen or heard, 1 
is to be predicted ithat the man has eaten the flesh of 
lizards or fish. Ina stmilar manner, the prognostication 
ef abortion of a pregnant woman ‘should .be made at a 
query 32. e., 1f there are evil omens at the time of con- 
sultation, there will be miscarriage. 


galagaarea eesalag guile Tae | 
AMA VAT TaTAgKsTad A WAG WRat 


Sloka 36.—At a query as to what would be the sex 
of the child to be born, if a man is seen, inferred, present 
or touched, the birth of a boy is to be predicted ; if it isa 
woman that is seen, etc., a girl; and if it isa eunuch, a 
eunuch will be born. The 'child-birth will be easy and 
happy if drink, food, fruits and flowers are sighted at the 
time. 


TEA Bet TRIS A RBI PSRA eM Ia Arg U 
aeqismagarasaisraal ATAAAAT Roll, 


4160 qeesfrararm . [Adh. Sl, LI. 38-40. 


Sloka 37,—When a woman touches with the thumb 
her eye-brow, stomach or finger at a query, she must 
then be thinking of the childin the womb. The same 
prediction should be made when honey, ghee and such 
other things or gold, gems and corals, or her mother, 
nurse and children are in front of her. 


TATA TH HU TaegeMaaraagaa: | 
Ha AMS We Nseatera: Ker qT Hs! cil 


Sloka 38.—If, at a query, a woman touches the belly 
with her hand, it may be predicted that she is pregnant ; 
but if there should be evil omens at the time, she may 
have abortion. The same will take place when she pulls 
out her belly owing to the pain given by her seat. or puts 
one hand over the other. 


TTA Sheer TM LTE ATAAT azq | 
e ¢ ~ 
qTasegt Gor wt a RAH: asa 139 
Sloka 89.—When she touches the right nostril, she 
may conceive a month hence; when the left nostrial or 


the left year, two years hence ; when the right ear or the 
breasts, two months or four months hence respectively. 


iC ta Gary BAT & Ul TAY Ga ee TA FI 
AREA qeah MATE TITHE qiitagrasts Heqry [iol 


Sloka 40.—If she touches the root of her braid, she 
will give birth to three sons and two daughters; if the 
ears, five sons; if the hands, three sons; if the little 
finger, one son; if the ring finger, two sons; if the 
middle, three sons ; if the fore-finger, four sons ; and if 
the thumb, five sons. If she touches the big toes or the 
heels, she will give birth toa daughter. 


Adh. LI. Sl. 41-44.) qaqwgraaatsvara: 417 


ASMASAUVALTY AI BeAlgIzeay | 


CS BSTAeed Balyaaat AaIq liv 
Sloka 41.—If she touches her right thigh, she will 
give birth to two girls; if the left thigh, to two boys; if 
the middle of the forehead, to four sons, and if the end 
of the fore-head, to three sons. 


Alsserns TAIT As | 

AeqTASATHeIay Cal MTHATHT Vl 

‘ ~ e Cx 6 ° ~ 
SU HA GIANT AIST TeWUAAT Adl Ritz | 
RrngaeeTET TMA Tes TATA Has E AN 
Slokas 42-43.—When the pregnant woman touches the 
head, fore-head, brows, ears, cheeks, lower part of chin, 
teeth, neck, right shoulder, left shoulder, hands, chin, 
pipe of the neck, breast, right bosom, left bosom, heart, 
right side, left side, belly, hip, joint of buttocks and anus, 
right thigh, left thigh, knees, shanks or feet, she will give 
birth to a child in any of the asterisms in their order com- 
mencing from Krittika. 

~ AO AS e ¢ 

Sid ITI TAT RIAA AGE 

THEMATIC NET aay aes | 
fAgeataeant a a: aaad- 
WAiUlaaqadiia: saasar aa |evil 
Sloka 44.—Thus have I ‘explained in clear terms’ 

the prognostics of touching the limbs, after carefully exa- 
mining the treatises on this science, ifor enabling people 
to attain their cherished desires. An astrologer, who 
knows all this and is endowed with high ‘intelligence and 
a large heart, will always be honoured by kings as well as 
peoples. 


Thus ends the 5ist Adhyaya on “Prediction through limbs,” 
q. G- 53 


418 7 | geedftararg, [Adh. LI, Sl. 1-3, 


zRTITY 142i Characteristics of Pimples. 


This chapter also is declared to be spurious although this 
subject has been referred to by the author previously. ~ 


fsatvadtiagsn alat ean liza a | 


THAT AM KS AMAL ATATATATLT AI 

Sloka 1.--The pimples of the people 6f the four 
classes beginning with Brahmins are white, red, yellow 
and dark respectively; and the respective colours are 
auspicious only for the particular classes and those below 
them and not for those abovethem. The idea is that 
white is good for Brahmins ; white and red for Ksha- 
triyas ; white, red and yellow for Vaisyas; and white, 
red, yellow and dark for Sudras. 


Stearsmaa: f feat aaat qt arava 
etaiea again: I TAITAATT gaieat = | 
REGIA Wh ATAVSMa ATT 
FAsat ARTAISAASMTAT AAT Ted Peary UR 


Sloia 2.—Pimples, glossy and clear in lustre, on the 
head indicate a great deal of wealth; on the back of the 
face, immediate happiness or fortune; on the two eye- 
brows, misfortune; in the middle of the brows, meeting 
with beloved persons very soon and wickedness ; on the 
eye-lids, grief; on the eyes, sight of friends; on the 
frontal bone, renunciation; and in the places through 
which tears fall down, worries. 


FINNS TAIT AAS 
gueatagaran yt fd soit 
AULA THHAIT WITT ATA 
RA CHITTY graMATTSTY |II 


Adh, LII. SI. 446.]  firvaareitsvata: 419 


Sloka 3.—Those on the nose and temples, give 
cloths and children respectively ; on the lips, lead to the 
acquisition of good food; so also are those on the lower | 
part of the chin; on the fore-head, to plenty of money ; 
so too on the two sides of the jaw-bone; on the neck, 
to ornaments, food and drink ; on the ears, ear-ornaments 
and a knowledge of the metaphysical science. 

UaraMaTETaFauagia War 
AANA Wd FAICTISIA Bais | 
franty taeascacaag asAads- 
Bart waren awa aarat wy_aT NN 

Sloka 4.—Pimples on the joint of the head produce 
a hit from an iron instrument : on the neck, blows; on 
the heart and breasts, the acquisition of a son; on the 
sides, grief ; on the chest, attainment of desired objects 
or friends ; on tbe shoulders, frequent wanderings for 


getting food; and in the two armpits, loss of wealth 
in various ways. 


Baas FAT TUFTS Trai | 
TATA FY ANAeqaTTAT FAM ITZ ITT Samat I'ail 
Sloka 5.—Those appearing on the back cause the 
destruction of the bundle of miseries; on the arms, of 
the hosts of enemies; those on the wrists, cause arrest. 


or restraint; and those near the arms, acquisition of 
ornament, food, etc. 
faatd is another reading for faary. 


TA Aas YAY HURT: 
quai aril qa HE SARA | 

ad ad get gaitay Fz qaray 
aa Aas at gearerenat eae 4 


420 | Ss [Adh. LII. Sh 7-10, 


Sloka 6. ss Biples appearing on the hands, fingers 
and belly lead to the acquisition of wealth, fortune and 
grief respectively ; on the navel, to fine food and drink ; 
those beneath the navel, to loss of wealth through theft ; 
on the pelvis, to wealth and corn; on the penis, to the 
acquisition of a young wife and good sons; on the anus, 
to wealth ; and on the testicles, to fortune and happiness. 

TAMARA TMs BATA Alay | 
TAT TEMG eHs ATS IgNaAa: W911 

Sloka 7.—Those on the thighs indicate the obtain- 
ing of vehicles and a wife ; on the knees, loss on account 
of enemies ; on the shanks, trouble from weapons; and 
on the ankles, troubles through travelling and confinement. 


Resa ag ara SATA ATT AAA ETAT 
GCE ICTR i i q TAS BA: : TAY licll 
Sloka 8.—Those on the buttocks, heels and feet 
cause in their order loss of wealth, illicit cohabitation, 
and travelling ; and on the fingers, imprisonment ; and on 
the thumb, sa ag from ee 
TeTUATMVVsH TAMA TWAITTA TAT | 
Gel Hated Gar aigaitara arctan USI 
Sloka 9.—Throbbing, inflammation (tumour) and 
boils on the right half of the body and hits on the left 
half are favourable to men, while they are auspicious for 
women in the other side, 2.¢., throbbing, etc, on the left 
side and hits on the right. 
aa fieattarn: sie aaa 
ATASRAATISATHT WHRTS | 
wala HIROEATTITEANT FT- 


+ fantanonht atrat sede goll 


Adh. LIM. S11.) 9 rnaraitsears: 49}: 


Sloka 10.—Thus have I given an analysis of the 
pimples from head to foot; in the same manner, ulcers 
and marks may be classified. The existence, on the 
bodies of living beings, of moles, special marks and hairy 


circles also produce similarly the effects enumerated 
above. 


Thus ends the 52nd Adhyaya on the “Characteristics of 
Pimples.” 


AAA 4311 = House-building. 


TAT AAMT RABATVEBAITEWMATTT | 
feaisqa aad Aaqaiaerete 2 
Sloka’ 1.—{ shall now expound for the delectation of 
learned astrologers the science of building. houses, handed 
down by the creator through an unbroken succession of 
sages. 

Dr. Kern remarks as follows: 

‘“ According to Utpala, Garga, etc., more explicit is the state- 
ment in a work bearing the title of 21 Fatimaanagarsar, where we 
read, 

gir NG areqarest Ga aaa aaa | 
MMWVAT: AUT ACAAT ZITA: tl 
SHAUZMHEA TIT AFACTMEASA | 

a farsa aaa ararswraega: 

Hazes gayets ultedisraia | 
wy a faawlad asa “gear aswqualie: qameqaaza | 
Vseg@nat FAI: _ Fava waaiaaaat Awieasaqsiz 


This passage, with many others, shows that Garga, Parasara, 
and the like, are mere mythological beings, of exactly the same 


422 geaigaraa = [Adh. LIT, Sl. && 


historical value with Brahman, Viswakarman, Vasudeva. In the 
opening stanzas of the faaa, we find, - 
Age AIal Ts ae_quey quaagy li 
QUAL: WE FEFUNA FETA: Mig a asa;g# | 
a teal saat Fara stara aresx agazywa 
faguiara | 
argued wdeala sierat weaaeqar | 
The Viswak seems to be a compilation, for most of the pas- 
sages quoted by Utpala, either from what he terms facureqat 
or from Garga, from Brihaspati, Viswakarman himself; Kasyapa 


etc., recur in the Viswak, acopy of which is in the translator's 
possession.”’ 


feat fea yaraageaa treat aditer | 

ATATTNT Azal MiMTArageE =a (2 

aq a 4a gdia quaiaiha: a aya | 

aaa AA TWeTaT ETAT 11311 

Slokas 2-3—There was, it is said, some Being* that 

obstructed the Earth and the Sky with its body. That 
was suddenly caught hold of and placed topsy-turvy by 
the multitude of Gods, who became the presiding deities 
of the several limbs of the Being that were touched by 


them. The creator ordained that Being to be the House- 
God of the nature of Gods. 


aur a ggeqia: | 

Gu Sagi wredieagya agvay | 
BACT ATA NUIT ASS Waa aa: ti 
agEt facut Jat var: Geqr wangar: | 
wate: MENTAPAT a Aaya | 
fafarantraet Raarete & qi: | 
wae eT_TEs Far aaleease 


Aah, LIL. Sl. 4.7.) frraraitsearz: 423 


SARALIFNAH CATT TIDE Tea | 
ANAT Gq ANA SEAT UII 
Sloka 4-—-The King’s house is one of five’ kinds. 
The best of them is 108 cubits in width and the other 
four are 100, 92, 84, and 76 cubits respectively. Their 
length is greater than the breadth by a quarter (2. ¢., 
135, 125, 115, 105 and 95). 


aM SA BAT: | 
asa ERAT TY ae | 
ela naraacats aurerstiaana gu 
frat weaqy 389 aat seegza | 
Ga ag ag: galgemt a gave gas 0 
qig: vigdiar Aaratdaaat aarsizs | 
ad qazerin TETaAleTaT SEIT 
Sloka 5. —The five houses of a. commander-in-chief 
are in order 64, 58, 52, 46 and 40 cubits in width, and 
their length exceeds the breadth by a sixth. 
qigaqqaaiadtar aaa ga arate | 
MVtIaga seq ATAaL TAA ST Ue 
Sloka 6.—The houses of ministers are 60, 56, 52, 
48 and 44 cubits in breadth and their length exceeds 
their breadth by an eighth. The houses of queens have 
half the dimensions of the above ones. 
~ AR: ¢ Can 
aig: asad qausarvaisaisata: | 
scaneaa Feed GE ATVATATATATT (Noll 
Sloka 7.—The width of the houses of the Yuvaraja is 


"80, 74, 68, 62 and 56 cubits respectively and their length 
exceeds the breadth by a third. The dimensions of the 


424 qeeaftarara [Adh. LITT. SL 8-2). 


houses of the younger princes are half of those of the 
Yuvaraja’s. 
TAAAMASA AAEAATUATSIT IT | 
TATA AAT BakPasaTs aA Mc 


Sloka 8.—The measure for the houses of feudatory 
chiefs, nobles and king’s officers is equal to the differ- 
ence between the measurements of King’s houses and 
those of the minister’s. The dimensions of the houses of 
chamberlains, courtesans and artistes are equal to the 
difference between the measurements of the houses of 
the King and the Yuvaraja. 


AAMIHAat WTAT Rawaqery | 
FAUAA aaa BAT essTaTATT 1A 


Sloka 9.—The houses of all directors and officers 
(of stables, elephant-yards, dairies, royal kitchens, etc.) 
should be of the dimensions of treasure-houses and _ plea- 
sure-houses ; the difference between the measurements of 
the houses of Yuvarajaand minister gives the measure of 
the houses of heads of industrial workshops and of envoys. 


AAMCAZIA Aaaqard wa wWaeiy | 

qEATAGT SEF GaATRTITATTs 1on 
Sloka 106.—The five sorts of houses of royal astrolo- 
gers, preceptors and physicians measure 40, 36, 32, 28, 


and “4 cubits in breadth and their length exceeds the 
breadth by a sixth. 


aitata at Rene: @ Tr Sreaalaga: Yaar | 
Tony ees Reargseaiing eaq 12 eH 
Sloka 11,—lIt is auspicious for a house to have the 


same height as its breadth. The length of houses con- 
sisting of single halls should be double their breadth. 


Adh. LIL Si, 12-14.) Arvansitsvara: 425 


| MAT A STRAT: 
AZ MSTMIages a saraaieaa: | 
Mat Hyt qarsaseqae a 


Tawra sifeaq at Aaeaae tar | 
MPSynaaat spracAAta Saray ue 
acai faint ararstadad Serq | 
TEMG TATA AIA ARA WeTaq uezu 


Slokas 12-13 —The breadth of the houses of Brah- 
mins and other four classes range from 32 cubits to 16, 
each being diminished by 4; 7%. e., Brahmins have five 
houses with the above measurements; Kshatriyas have 
four with 28, 24, 20 and 16 cubits for their breadth; 
Vaisyas, three with 24,20 and 16 and Sudras two with 
20 and 16. The lowest class of people (Pariahs, etc.) 
must have houses with smaller dimensions than these, 
The length of the houses of the four classes exceeds the 
breadth by a tenth, eighth, sixth and fourth respectively. 

qaaTageaeaaaa Karaasz | 
AAA A Aaa UAFHUT ev! 

Sloka 14.—The treasury and pleasure-house must 
have the dimensions equal to the difference between 
those of the King’s and Commander-in-Chief’s houses. 
The measure for the houses of King’s officers is equal to 
the difference between those of the houses of Comman- 
der-in-chief and one of the four classes. That is, if an 
officer belongs to the Brahmin class, the difference 
referred to is one between the measure of the Command. 
er-in-chief’s house and an ordinary Brahmin mentioned 
in the previous two slokas; if the officer is a Kshatriya, 


we have to subtract the measure for a Kshatriya’s house; 
¥. & 64 


426 geeditatara (Adh, LIII. $1. 15-17: 


and so forth. [If it is a Kshatriya officer, he will have 
four houses and the measure should be found out by 
subtracting from that for the 2nd, etc. of the Commander- 
in-Chief. Similarly in the case of officers belonging 
to other classes. | 


aT TANat AaTATaAEsAT ATAT | 
alata SAAT YART TT ATTN ULE 


Sloka 15.—The houses of persons of mixed classes 
viz., Parasavas, sons of Brahmins by Sudra women, 
Bhurja Kantakas, sons of Brahmins by Vaisya women, 
and Murdhavasiktas, sons of the same by Kshatriya 
women, have a measure equal to a half of the sum of 
the measures for a Brahmin’s house and for the other 
parent’s. It is inauspicious for all to have houses which 
either exceed or fall short of the given measurements. 


The measure for the house of a Parasava is 32+20 = 26 


Z 
cubits in breadth. 


qartanaiad aeagqsaeiageint | 
ASied MARU TAIAUMG ST Was Ul 


| Sloka 16.— There is no fixed measure for houses of 

cattle, houses of ascetics, granaries, arsenals, houses of 
sacred fire, and pleasure-houses; but the writers on this 
science do not approve of a height of more than 100 cubits, 

Aare mi: 

~ « ? e td 
Waa sry agswmsyse Fa: | 
MY ABMS J BAT aeratay on 


ealghtardiat aqhranea farsa sara | 
Vat HAcaEd waaqasiseas iki 


Sloka 17,—Add 70 to the measure for the houses of 
the Commarider-in-Chief and the King ; keep this sum 


Adh. LIII. Sl. 18-21.] frvarsitsvara: 427 


in two places, and divide one by 14 and the other by 35. 
The two quotients give the measure, for the hall and 
verandah respectively of the two. 


SANTA Aqaakaanage : Arar: | 
aa AaaTATH AAS aE: kel 
irigigtan: armageis Fay | 
saat fafa) awww Haaq 128i 


Slokas 18-19.—In the -houses of Brahmins, etc. 
which measure from 32 cubits, the halls should have a 
breadth of 4 cubits 17 digits; 4 cubits 3 digits, 3 cubits 
16 digits, and 3 cubits 13 digits respectively. The 
verandahs of the above are in order, 3 cubits 19 digits, 3 
cubits 8 digits; 2 cubits 20 digits, 2 cubits 18 digits and 
2 cubits 3 digits. 


Maramaea Hisar ier eeazarg | 
AITA ATA Al ANF AA AitT Nell 
araraaala wag aged & cadet | 
(on Q 
ataalita = ancqresrag: qfaran vals 2H 
Slokas 20-21—Outside the house there should be 
made a foot-path whose breadth is a third of the hall’ 
If the path is in front (to the east) of the house, the 
latter is termed “Soshneesha,”one with a turban. If 
it is behind (to the west of) the hcuse, it is called Saya- 
sraya one with western or hind support; if it is on the sides, 
it is termed Savashtambha one with proper support ; and if 
it is all round the name of the house is Susthita, well- 
fixed. All these types are approved by the authorities on 
architecture; 


428 | qeeediQarara [Adh. LI{I Sl. 22-25: 


frenevteata: Tas AIT: | 
RTA YAN A TARTATT RA 
Sloka 22.—The height of the first storey should be 
a sixteenth of the width with an addition of four cubits. 
The height of each of the following upper storeys is to be 
lessened by one-twelfth of the preceding one. 


; So the height of the ground floor of the King’s house is 
8 
ie +4 = 62+4 or 10 cubits 18 digits. 


Sqalq TWeaaa: aaAat agat aata fUTa: | 


ABCRGaa weHaat ga Fae ne 
Sloka 23.—The wall of all houses made of burnt 
bricks should be a sixteenth part of their breadth. There 
is no restriction regarding the houses made of wood. 
am a Wi: 
eaettentaa gerny we4T | 
grafts 4 edeqr Weuds arava 
CHAAR AAR ATTTSAgS Ta: | 
TH AISHSIeN gwMTda MeHEA Aw 


Sloka 24,—The breadth of the houses of kings, 
commanders (and others) is to be increased by an ele- 
venth and 70 added. This number willl give the height 
of the doors in digits, and a half of that, their width. 


Fanalat sarang watatsercaresaaa: | 
agigt favaeat grea Aga seers: URI 


 Sloka 25.—In the case of Brahmins, etc., the num- 
ber denoting the breadth in cubits should be taken as that 
of digits and that increased by 18.° To this should be. 


Aah: LIE. S). 96-28.)  Parvaraitswera: 429 


added an eighth part of itself, That will give the width 
of the door; and thrice this will be its height. 

The width of Brahmin house is 32 cubits. *s is6. This is 
to be taken as 6 digits. Add 18. i.¢, 6+18 = 24 digits. 
244-3 of 24 = 27 digits. This is its breadth and 27X3= 8&1 
digits, its height. | 


STP AMAT ATTA AREA TESTA | 
MAINT BA ATA AT AFTAA VW 


VHraAATTAlaaT: TeTTATT | 
TAT MASHaT MAS Tatas or 


 Slokas 26-27,.—The thickness of the two side-frames 
of the door is as many digits as the height numbers 
eubits. One and a half times this gives the thickness of 
the threshold and the upper-block. The breadth of all 
the four pieces is an eightieth part of seven times the 
door-height. An eightieth part of nine times the height 
(of a’storey) gives the width of a pillar at the bottom; 
and the same lessened by a tenth is its width at the top. 


A pillar of the ground floor in a King’s house wil] 
have a width of about | cubit and 5 digits at the bottom 
and about 1 cubit and 2 digits at the top. Its circum- 
ference is thrice the width. 


ARA(Al GAR TWIseTfatsawal (eT | 
SATA | Asa Vlas TA ZA TM Mel! 


Sloka 28-—A pillar that is perfectly square in the 
middle (leaving off the two ends) is called Ruchaka; 
one that is octagonal, a Diamond; one with sixteen 
angles (or sides), a double Diamond; one with 32 sides, 
Praleenaka ; and a round one is called a. cylinder, . 


430. +, geedfterara [Adh, LIL. Sl:29.39, 


wed asa arat aga ara TSA ATTNSeg? | 
a AMAUE SAG Weta NeW 


- Sloka 29.—When the whole pillar is divided into 
nine equal parts, the first two parts will belong to the 
bottom and the last two to the top. Designs and artisti¢ 
figures can be made in these parts. The lowest part is 
called the Support; the second, the Pot; the eighth, 
the Lotus and the topmost, the Upper Lip. 

These names must be significant. 
MEAT TEST ATASATBITTT AT | 
TAA TaIaaryd Wear M7 113011 

Sloka 80.—The thickness of the chief beam is 
equal to that of the pillar; above these are beams and 
minor beams , and their thickness is lessened by a quar- 
ter of the jcaeapdiately preceding one. 


aafatgset aaa AIRE aaa | 
qagauqarat Brea gieagiady uae 


Sloka 81.—A house with an unbroken verandah 
all round is termed Sarvatobhadra (all round good). This 
kind of house with four doors is auspicious for Kings and 
Gods. 

aa Ss iy: 

sarat taaseer are am qaraa: | 
age aaalag agzizaarqay wi 


AraaaHea: Borperng wT: | 


att oPaaaing Pera aenftt wrath weVe 
Sloka 32.-A house which has verandahs starting: 
from the wall of the hall and going to its extremity from. 
left to right is termed Nandyavarta, which should have 

only three entrances leaving off the western one«:.. 


pe 


Adh. LIE, Sl: 33-55.] Arrarettseara: 43% 


aa Sw: 
TAA a: TE: THBNAA ware: | 


Ltn 


feat Rin gran aeaadina waz i 


Aiiiwegiseanas AeTisety ZawMageas | 
aaa THAT BE Ta Tia BAW UV 
Slokw 33.—The front verandah of the main build- 
ing should extend from the left hall to the right hall. 
Another verandah is made thence from left to right and 
still another beautiful one from there in the same man- 
ner. A building with such -verandahs is known as Var- 
dhamana, which should not have an entrance in the 
south. 
aa a aa: 
giisegisranaat & aar afant mar: | 
Peart airot gre adaraiaia araa i 
— AMseaTasiwegs TTEATA ageaa aieay | 
' aeaAvasiea qagt as DAT UAVs 
Slokv 34 —In the Swastika imansion, the western 
verandah should extend from the left hall to the nght 
one; the other two verandahs (southern and northern) 
originating from the above should touch the end in the 
east, and a fourth one (the eastern) is held between them. 
Such a mansion with an eastern entrance is favourable. 
aut @ ai: 
Ta gis-Trasiseg: areat gi agar | 
aerePatata ga: TZ wie yaq i 


aT aiienreioaeandl azataterat aat | 
VAG Be aT Yaguedsaiy gay ual 


Sloka 36 —In the | Ruchaka type of building, there 
are two’ verandahs touching’ the ends, in‘ the east 


432 _ qeeigararg (Ach. LUI. SI, 86-41. 


and west ; and touching these two internally, there are 
two more. In this a northern entrance is not auspicious; 


while in the other quarters they are good. 
aat @ Wi: : 


META Seal wWaeait awa IW | 
Met Bre Haar VeANTAHlVG | AeTAT Ul 
AG aeqag aaat admaasg | 
aaKeTs HET AT BAS TIUgTATT URG 
Sloka 36.—The Nandyavarta and Vardhamana 
types of houses are best suited to people of all classes; 
Swastika and Ruchaka are muderate, and the rest are 
good for kings, ministers, etc. 
BUI sala Rea Hass sayz | 
MEMS AIG FAT WSS TT UR 
ara gel Wares Aaaaaaag | 
QUHAITAl Ais Gaetaawaey li 
Slokas 87-88.—A three-halled building, lacking the 
northern hall, is known as Hiranyanabha and indicates 
good luck; similarly, one without the eastern hall 
known as Sukshetra conduces to prosperity; one with. 
out the southern hall known as Chulli destroys wealth ; 
and one without the western hall called Pakshaghna 
causes hatred and the destruction of children. 


fagidaqcaea aqaa azaat ae | 
CVTCANTHTY AATSY TVGAT GFA NAAN 
Ta FT Ws WAS Thawtrat say | 
fraisalnitdaadt qeradeg live 
QVSTA AUTSY HAF Ast aarea | 
fawangrgeut mfafatte: czas are eeu 


Adh. LITI. Sl. 39-41.]  Favagrettseara: 433 
Slokas 39-41.—A house with only a western and 
a southern hall is termed Siddhartha ; one with a western 
and a northern hall, Yamasurya; one with a northern 
and an eastern hall, Danda; one with an eastern and 
a southern hall, Vata; one with an eastern and a west- 
ern one, Graha-Chulli ; and one with a southern and a 
northern one, Kacha The first kind of house leads to 
the acquisition of wealth; the second, to the death of 
the house-holder ; the third, to punishment and death ; 
the fourth, to grief from quarrel; the fifth, to loss of 
money ; and the sixth, to hatred among kinsmen. 


There are many writers on architecture such as Viswakarman, 
Maya, Kama and Hiranyagarbha. The last one mentions 64 or 
120 varieties of houses. Great kings can have mansions of 8% 
storeys; Brahmins, of 74; Kshatriyas, of 64; Vaisyas, of 5%; 
and Sudras, of 34. The height of Sudra’s house ought not to 
exceed 20 moderate cubits; that of Vaisya’s, 40 cubits; that of 
Kshatriya’s, 60 cubits; that of Brahmin’s, 80 cubits ; and that of 
king’s, 100 cubits. The last is the maximum limit for the height 
of human habitations. 


According to the same authority, the height of the founda. 
tions of best houses is to be 2% cubits. 


There is restriction rezarding the height of the storeys of 
buildings with two, three and four halls. In a house of a single 
hall, the height is equal to its breadth. 


According to another authority, viz Sakra, the width of single- 
halled houses is not restricted; but it should not exceed the 
length. Should it.exceed the length, such houses would be called 
Utsargas. But single-halled houses are not prescribed for Brah- 
mins, etc. Such houses ate not conducive to longevity, but if 
made of straw, they can be permitted(Garga). 


Viswakarman Speaks of three kinds of digits, vis. major, 
moderate and minor. The first is the length of eight of full- 


grown barley grains ; the. second, of seven ;" and the third, of six. 
q. a. 56 


434 7 geediigerara [Adh: LIII. $1. 42-43, 


Thoy are respectively called Prasaya, Sadharana., and Sama. 
It appears our author refers here to the last kind of digit. Viswa- 
karman opines that in the construction of houses, ete, the first 
kind of digit should be adopted; of beds, eating plates, vehicles, 
etc., the last variety. 


The combination of old and new bricks, baked and raw ones, 
etc., 18 forbidden. But Hiranyagarbha says: if necessary, raw 
bricks should be used below, and then baked ones. Maya objects 
to this and states :—There are five things to be done for houses; 
vtz.. Katima, Granthima, Dayima, Ripima and Khatima. Hiranya- 
garbha says: There are different kinds of houses according to 
the materials used in the construction. One built of stone is 
called Mandira; of baked bricks, Vastu: this is the best; of 
raw bricks, Sumanta; of mud, Sudhara ; of wooden logs, Mana 
sya; of bamboos, Nandana; of canvas for kings, Vij jaya; of vari 
eties of straw, Kalima. 


For house-holders the best houses are those made of gold, 
silver, copper and iron. They are respectively called Pushkara, 
Sribhava, Suryamanta and Chanda. There are also four other 
varieties, viz., those made of Jac, Anila, tin and Varibandhaka 
(ataeqa). Thus there are fourteen varieties of houses in all 
Categories. 


aHaiatrart cq Ty Talaragl Tat: | 

ATAU BU SiAIARIATHIGALs ler 

Sloka 42.—In order to divide the ground-plan of 
a house into 81 squares, draw ten lines from east to 
west and ten others from north to south. Inside the 
diagram, thirteen deities are situated, and thirty two in 


the outer compartments. Thus, there are 465 deities in 
this figure. (p. 436) 


| fefsssieasaet-qadeen gaiscates |. . 
‘Raratmast crorgistre: wer nese 


Adh. LIII. SI). 44-48.].  farwaarattsvara: 435. 


qa farasEasAN-qa CATRTUTAT | 


fratiainanissaqncearaTaae eel 
ANGAST WTIEAT Tits Bor Talsiegwat | | 
aBeaayaMMAasietaelats AT: UVa 
Slokas 48-45.—The deities situated im the outer 
compartments beginning with the north-eastern corner 
and ending with the south-eastern are :—Sikhi, Parjanya, 
Jayanta, Indra, Surya, Satya, Bhrisa, Antariksha and 
Anila. Then follow from South-east to South-west, 
thence to north-west and thence to north-east, Pushan, 
Vitatha, Brihatkshata, Yama, Gandharva, Bhringaraja, 
Mriga, Pitru, Dauvarika, Sugriva, Kusumadanta, Varuna, 
Asura, Sosha, Papayakshma, Roga, Ahi, Mukhya, Bhal- 
lata, Soma, Bhujaga, Aditi, and Diti, thus 32 in all. 


Hea TH TAREHTsaaa Raa: saz | 
-ORiedy WaaTACAT aaa TaTsy Ws 1 

fagaiaaaaeaieasiseat UTISAATTAT F | 

TaTIUTACANAGa AAT TAT 2! 

AM Aaa Ber sara zara: | 

HT Fat VARA VX Alrsssaeqaey leit 


Slokas 46-48.—In the centre, there is Brahman occu- 
pying nine divisions ; to his east, there is Aryaman (in 3 
squares); next and to the right of Aryaman, at 
the interval of one compartment, there is Savita ina 
single square; next to him to the right is Vivaswan; 
next to him is Indra; then going up, @..e., to the west 
of Brahman there are Mitra (in 3) and Raja Yakshma; 
then turning tothe east, there is Prithvi Dhara (in 3) and 
Apavatsa. Thus, these. eight. are along the .circumfe» 


436 ' . geeafdararg, [Adh. LIII. Sl], 49-50,. 


rence around Brahman. In the internal north-eastern 
corner (behind Parjanya), there is Apah; South-east (be- 
tween Savitru and Anila), Savitra ; South-west, Jaya and 
north-west, Rudra 


NORTH - Jalan 
Bs on FE ° a ne 
i 
pases = 4 z ii Z i 4 
ps 


So$HA YAranOA PRT ww iDitama ae 
7:9 | serra 
4 


asia 


wes vant a 


KUSUMADANTA £ a a 
que : 


oe 


7 
pace | 
<< 
s> 


SUGRIVA 


i ¢ is ee 
TAuvawikal JAVA ' a4 < SAVITRALSTARINGN 
aq iz a x ay oFainn 

< x - 

Uv- a a 2 ag oa 
iPITRU IMRIGA | Z 3 b PUSHAN, ANILA 
aT | Bo 

di 8] ~ 


SOUTH - ater 


MIAMI Weasels aTisay | 

Ge BM BOT TeH TTL eI Tq |: (Vel 

ae aaa: yee Aaa ala: saqeztar: | 

~ bs Ee fee La 

AUMAAISET AIT eETTATTTET 11% oF! 

Sloka. 49-50.—Apah, Apavatsa, Parjanya, Agni and 

Diti form one group, each occupying one compartment, 
in the north-eastern corner- In the same manner, there 


are five deities in each of the corners. The remaining 
deities,.20 in number, in the outer compartments, have 


Adh, Lil. Sl. 61-54,] Arraratiseara: 437 


each power over two squares. The remaining 4 deities 


headed by Aryaman have Jurisdiction over three squares 
each in the four quarters. 


- Soin each corner there are five deities ruling over single 
squares. Savita, Savitra, Anila, Antariksha and Pushan in the 
South-east; Vibudhadhipathi, Jaya, Dauvarika, Pitru and Mriga 
mn South-west ;and Rajayakshma, Rudra, Papayakshma, Roga and 
Ahi in North-west. Twenty deities exercise authority over two 
squares each; in the east, Jayanta, Indra, Surya, Satya and 
Bhrisa; inthe south Vitatha, Brihatkshata, Yama, Gandharva 
and Bhringaraja; in the west, Sugriva, Kusumadanta, Ambu- 
pati, Asura and Sosha; and in the north, Mukhya, Bhallata, 
Soma, Bhujaga and Aditi. The remaining four, viz, Aryaman, 
‘Vivasvan, Mitra and Prithvidhara in the four quarters beginning 


with the east (with reference to Brahman) preside over three 
squares each. 


Taimieeqal FOUSTAT GAIA faa frat | 
AT Fa MASATAAT TATA Weal 


“GaeAel TA EMITS AT LAT: | 
AMIN TI YT TA AAA FT aliaas 42k 
Aaa secaaza: way ast Raat Raat | 
BE Ay TAF HT saa: sityVtar: weg 
Ta ATA MAST A TAIMAeM | 
HE TRAV EVA AAT Gasisaa: Weevil 
Slokas 51-54.—This House-God has his head 
turned towards the north-east and face hung down. 
Agni is situated on his head; Apa, on the face ; Aryaman, 
on the breast ; Apavatsa, on the chest ; Parjanya, Jayanta, 
Indra and Surya of outer compartments, on the eye, ear, 


chest and shoulder 'respectively; Satya, Bhrisa, Anta» 
siksha, Anila and Pushan, on the arm; Savita and 


438 | qeedftararg (Adh. LIT. SI. 55-56. 
Savitra on the hand; Vitatha and Brihatkshata, on the 
side; Vivasvan, on the stomach; Yama, Gandharva, 
Bhringaraia and Mriga on the thigh, knee, shank and. 
buttock réspectively. The above deities are situated in 
the parts on the right side of the House-God. Simi- 
larly, there are deities on the left side, z. e., Prithvidhara, 
on the left breast; Diti, on the left eye; Aditi, on the 
left ear; Bhujaga on the left side of the chest; Soma, 
on the left shoulder; Bhallata, Mukhya, Ahi, Roga and 
Papayakshma, on the left arm; Rudra and Rajayakshma, 
on the left hand; Sosha and Asura, on the left side, 
Varuna, on the left thigh ; Kusumadanta, on the left knee; 
Sugriva, on the left shank; Dauvarika, on the left 
buttock; Sakra and Jayanta, on the genita! organ; 
Brahman, on the heart, and Pita, on the foot. 


ARCHITAAT Feat tary RTA | 
AM ATA AMBIT WAH 
aot a alecatsrqgeragaaiea: ara: | 
sweat Y agra Baar fafa fF yeu 
Slokas 55-56.—-Or, drawing nine lines across and 
nine vertically and thus getting 64 squares, diagonals 
should be drawn from corner to corner. Of this area, 
Brahman rules over the central four squares; and the 
eight deities situated along the diagonals in the corners 
near him over half a square (viz, Apa, Apavatsa, Savita, 
Savitra, Vibudhadhipati, Jayanta, Rajayakshma and 
Rudra) ; in the outer corners, Sikhi, Antariksha, Anila, 
Mriga, Pitru. Papayakshma, Roga and Diti, over half 
a square; those that are on both sides of these, over 


one and a half squares (Parjanya, Bhrisa, Bhringa- 
raja, Dauvarika, Sosha and Nagadhipathi, ¢.¢., Ahi)¥ 
and the remaining twenty, over two squares. tii 


Adh. LIII. SI. 57.] - Rrvanettswara: 439 
nnn UREN: a 


Though the author speaks of only quadrangular houses here, 
elsewhere, he speaks of hexangular, octangular, circular, etc. 


= a. 


PARJANYA 


ae 
VARUNA <t INDRA 
WEST 
ey, ; 


BRISA 


PS é 
SOUTH 


aeqal aarat aval Tart At aT TaTATT | 


malar qa rary ais aedistemay: No 
Sloka 57—The meeting poigts of the longer dia- 
gonals and the exact middle pints of the squares should 
be considered as the vulnerable points which a wise man 
ought not to hurt. 
Utpal seems to have written a work on architecture; for he 
says: 
GU Berslaaregqraaray | 
'  Gangry ategqa (raqatsa garety | 
 qarquge sith grafaberditad u 


MUKHYA 
BHALLATA 

SOMA 

BHUJAGA 


EAST 


NVWVAUY 


VAYVHONV9 
VWVA 
VIVHSWIVHING 

VHIVLIA 


440 qeeaditeraa [Adh. LIII. Si. 5862. 


framrestes sega Bearaa aaa | 
APAUNRIFUANT Balaaeaeaay ii 
VaUGea wits woyast waters: | 
aagaavenioneaal: Tisai qa | 
Teavaged Keay wes cl 
Sloka 58.—lIf the above vulnerable points be hurt by 
impure materials, nails, pillars, pegs, etc., they would 
give trouble to the owner of the house in the correspond- 
ing limbs of his body. 


é Ly 
HLA ATH WEATAT TSATIFATY | 
aga aatatd feaait: aad aq usu 
Sloka 59.—If, at the time of a query, the house- 
owner scratches a limb, there will be some hurt in the 
corresponding part of the house. Or at the time of fire- 
worship, if there is any evil omen or unnatural behaviour 
of the fire in any particular aspect of it, the correspond- 
ing limb of the House-God will be faulty through a_ nail 


or peg. 
aaqaiaaiera TaRer waa ag | 
[sient Tans anesdg seg rq Goll 
ARN Wangs venir a iaeacaanaaray | 
qed fe adel SuNTaaseTAT ge 
aaa at Preneralad Tage: |] 
ae amacaat nadia aia Rala 1821 
' Slokas 60-62,—~If the thorn is wooden, the own 
will sustain loss of wealth; if it is made of bone, the 


will be trouble to his cattle and danger from disease 
[if it be of metal, there will be danger from weapor 


Adh. LIIL S). 63-66.]  frvanirseara: 441 

and if it be skulls or hair, there will be death. If it be char- 

coal, there is danger from thieves; if it be ashes, there 

will be constant risk from fire. The dart, unless it be of 

gold or silver, will prove disastrous on a vulnerable point. | 
A heap of husk or chaff whether found in a vulnerable 

spot or any other, retards the acquisition of wealth ;| 

even an ivory peg situated in a vulnerable part will lead 

to misery. 

The portion in square brackets is omitted in some editions. 
Tima Fea gaaaA WIAA TAIT | 
YENI TAT WHAAT AUT 1 2 
ATATUA FAT TEAayaier asafearia | 
Tq TSAR Nth ANTITATOTA 16 VII 

Slokas 63-64.—The nine points of intersection of 

the lines connecting Roga and Anila, Pitru and Anila, 
Sosha and Vitatha, Mukhya and Bhrisa, Jayanta and 
Bhringa, and Aditi and Sugriva are considered to be the 
most vulnerable parts. The measure of the vulnerable 
part is an eighth part of a square. 


~~ 


qqemawaal aaa zaqisgerla Riot: | 


¢ AS 


qasaaseag: Rusa Alas We 4l 
Sloka 65.—A diagonal has in breadth as many | 
digits as each square numbers cubits. The breadth of 


a line (running east to westand north to south) is one 
and a half times that of the diagonals. 


AAS] AAT TAAITTEl YElrareary | 
SeselaqpaNeTEtaera ad Tar ESI 


_Sloka 66.—A house-owner wishing for happines 5 


should carefully guard Brahman situated in the middle of | 
a. &. 56 | —— 


442 qeeaigatara [Adh. LIII. Sl. 67-70, 
the house. By hurting him through remnants of food 
and the like. he will come to grief, 


afangaa ela aeaatsdaaiseaayan | 

alasyateagnia: Pie qegtad aa: Gol 

Main: gaat seret ait Bore | 

“~ ba \Y ~ 
Bae saat aaigaia areas Sl 
Slokas 67-68.—When the House-God is bereft of 

the right-arm, there will be loss of wealth and misery 
through women; when of the left arm, loss of money 
and corn; when of the head, loss of all virtues; when of 
the feet, misery from women, death of sons and servi- 
tude ; when the God is endowed with all limbs intact, 


the inmates of the house will be blessed with happiness 
mingled with honour and wealth. 


Taney Fe aaza walear Ta: | 
TY A AAI ST AT war aren: Sh 


- Sloka 69.—In the same manner are deities situated 
in the different parts of houses, towns and villages. To 
Brahmins and others in the above, proper divisions of 
these should be allotted. 


In these also, vulnerable points should be kept clean. 
Tage a faranigadbagetanrania | 
faaat a aql aad aated aeaq ayaa toll 
Sloka 70,—The dwellings of Brahmins, etc-, should 
be located in the north, etc. The houses are to be con- 
structed in such a way that when we enter the court-yard 
the houses lie to our right, ¢.¢., if a house faces the east, 
the entrance to its court-yard must face the north; if the 


south, the east ; if the west, the south; and if the north, 
the west, 


Adh, LIL. SI. 71-75.) frewareitseara: 443 


ATMA A Hea AATa FAqw: | 
Ser aay TUAAselat HVITAT: Wot 
Stoka 71.—The following are the effects of the 
doors at Sikhi, etc., whether in the plan of 81 compart- 
ments or of 64. 
MAsAy Slat WTA ARTBFAT | 
RATATAT BIT Ale | TAT 19M 
Sloka 72.—If the door is at Agni, Parjanya, etc, to 
Anila on the east, the effects in order are danger from 
wind, birth ot daughters, immense wealth, royal favour, 
hot temper, uttering falsehood, cruelty and theft. 
Hergaed Vy alaeq Weqagqaayie: | 
Ug BATA BaaAT Farag 93h 
Sloka 73.—If the door is at Anila, etc., up to Pitru 
on the south, the effects in order are few children, 
slavery, low life, increase of food, drink and children, 
honour, ingratitude, penury, destruction of sonsand power, 
gale fgated aqaait: aanearay | 
qaqa aqraas sagt Tat sa lvl | 
Sloka 74.—On the west, they are in order, son’s 
suffering ; increase of enemies ; no acquisition of wealth 
or sons ; the prosperity of sons and wealth; increase of 
money ; trouble from King; loss of money; and ill 
health. 
TAH Iga: Qawasla: aTAqUATT | 
VELOC CO MACIARC CHEE POR MTCT 
Sloka 75.—On the north, they are death or capti-. 
vity, increase of enemies, acquisition of wealth and sons, 


444 " * ggeafigaeorg, «= {Adh. LIL. SI. 76. 


RRA etre tenis CEREUS Sedans 


» 


t 


possession of all virtues, getting sons and wealth, en™ 
mity with one’s own son, faults in wife and poverty. 

In other Sasrtras, eight presiding deities are spoken of. Each 
has his own asterism. Similarly, the 32 doors also have their 
stars. By the agreement of the Moon and the stars, houses and 


doors ate to be constructed. The 8 Vastunaras with their stars 
and deities are: 


- Reet vaneg varger fag: at ZawRat | 
arate ag geet Har qegaa ga: 
AG Wangs vast aaa Haat | 
Lars Uga woh fF Wawer aa: ot 
ga: ofa alter a gt ciaa Uieott | 
WE _ RAN: ale: SW BRT Heya n 
weqaugRead Giqda fear: | 
faydgaa wa vasa fager: (ra: u 
ear gor Madam: fea Hangar | 
areas ANAT BUA vivad ya: 
SMTA BGs wit faa wre Aga: | 
The following Slokas give the asterisms of the doors :— 
gi Mel ATR DAM FT GAIT: | 
cit gama a wartag freag nv 
fas faster deo a ARTA TAZaAT | 
tazahaeg Ha mares i 
fq digazraznarus a freaaz t 
MMNMAaad BARA aay Ul 
AAU seaet WTF sas aay | 
aed Sel maREaghy 3 false U 
AMAPRTHIAEABAAZATAS FT | 
/wozrrtegaital aeeat hr a Sra NK It 
Sloka 76.—A door ‘being pierced by a road, tree, 
corner, well, pillar or water-sluice, is inauspicious, but on 


Adh, LILI. Sl. 77-81.] —- Ryraaraitseara: 445. 


its being removed to a distance equal to twice its height, 
it will not do any harm. 
au a ai: 
guUesargqihat wR aia ae :ieaa: | 
a 2raia wagar yea Wisoitsuar us 
TWAVAT AT AAT FALIT TSA | 
TEA AB SAASTAM AAMT Wes 9H! 
bay ~ ‘\ ~tN 
Kraan wala Aaray saanaz | 
MAA Bes: Foal Aatishyga lc 
Slokas 77-78.—A door hurt ‘by a road augurs the 
death of the owner; one by a tree, trouble to children ; 
one by mire, grief ; one by a runnel, expenses of money; 
one by a well, epilepsy ; by an idol of God, death of the 
owner ; by a pillar. frailty of women; and one facing 
Brahman, leads to the destruction of the family. 
" genta: qageaizasy faied aa gulaara: | 
aaah Jas aqua sqaaaa ata 7 1 98h 
St sWaa aaa ara age aq | 
HeTTA FRAC FA FATT Wala llcoil 
dismeaiatisaaeaiad waza | 
_metad wart vad ceghy: vier ee 
Slokas 79-81.--A door which opens by itself, pro- 
duces lunacy ; one that closes of its own accord, ruin of 
the family ; a door, which is too big, causes fear from the 
king; a low one indicates trouble from robbers and 
misery ; one above another and one too narrow are not 
auspicious ; one that is too broad leads to famine; a bent 
deor brings about the annihilation of the family; one 


446 : ‘qeediterara, [Adh. LIII. Sl. 82-85. 
that is pressed hard by the upper block causes trouble to 
the owner; one bent inwards augurs the death of the 
master; one bent outwards, absence from home; one 
standing awry in regard to its quarter, trouble from robbers. 


yest Teageraeedla STAT | 
TERoTAIAM aay TeaRaAGay Ue 
~ Sloka 82.—-The principal door ought not to be out- 
done by others through superior structure and design. The 
former must be embellished with auspicious objects such 
as water-pots, fruits, foliage and images of Siva’s attend- 
ants. 


CEA BAY Aral WTA! Teta: | 
qa faaiaratsy Taal Warat afa we 34 


quaaaman F Bory aaat ata: | 
AIT S|q sea arealeacsay fratg_aratied levi 


Sloka 83.—In the outer-corners beginning with the 
north east of a house are Charakee, Vidari, Putana and 
Rakshasee. Those who dwell in the corners of cities, 
houses or villages come to grief, whereas the outcastes, 
such as those that eat dog’s meat flourish there. 

Boe aueE Tq | 

Tealsat west ater Hog: TTANTATAA: | 

graimeat ani a aizat Sardar Rea: 

qa Aa Far asega: afra Raa: | 

tae waits eto Msiqqanura: ul 


TEMYARS Haass Tafa | 


VAMTY TTA Fareigraaagpeys (ici! 
_| Sloka 85,—The trees Peepul, Banyan, Indian fig and 
Aswattha are of untoward effects in the four corners be-’ 


Adh. LIIL SI. 86-88.] fraarattssarz: | 447. 


ginning with the south in order; while, in the directions 
begining with the north, they are favourable. 


aura mi: 


asaqaarsaed sa zeros | 
eae TMA AT TAL BIAgray Ul 
RY YF AT HATA FA FareswwaTy | 
eaaia waa: Wer AaAa_rray i 
Az: WAMUT Aa: UTA Acggraz: | 
Trey: TAA YT SARLATA WAT 


TTA Weta Roeraae atitasdarara | 

Bisa! ANAT TST THAIN Wc 

SrA A ASAT AeA WHAT Weary | 

TAMAR UIFSA TAT cll 

Slokas 86-87.--Thorny trees near the houses cause 

threat of enemies; milky ones lead to the destruction of 
wealth ; those laden with fruits, to the loss of children ; 
even the timber of these trees should be avoided in the 
construction of houses. If such trees are not cut down, 
worshippable ones such as Punnaga, Asoka, Arishta, 


Bakula, Jack, Samee and Sala are to be planted amidst. 
them. 


TAUAASA AYU Bea 

aval Bat a alata F asl Tug | 
aqeatl qalaieganraat 

qa fra faga arqaaeta lice 


Sloka 88.—-A ground that is soft, even, of sweet 
odour and taste, and abounding in commendable herbs, 
trees and creepers, and not hollow inside, confers pros- 
perity even on those persons who take rest on it from the 


448 © seeedimarara, = [Adh. LI. Sl. 89-92. . 
fatigue of a journey ; how much more then on those who 
have a permanent home on it ? 


aaaSAsdaA YATE Bata: aaa | 
SAM TAGS ATA Wala Bara ves 
Aa Aa WHI aeNlaqwagS fag: | 


aaa gf aval Rae AAT: uel! 

Slokas 89-90.—If a minister’s house is nearby, there 
will be loss of wealth ; if a rogue’s (or gambler’s) house, 
death of ason; if a temple, mental affliction; if a cross-way, 
ill repute ; if a holy tree, danger from planetary influences; 
if a house is filled with ant hills or holes, calamities; if a 
chasm is nearby, thirst ; and if the ground is in the shape 
of a tortoise, loss of money. 

semiegaas finatat aaaoraia | 
fiat wat TATTITAASAKATNY 11921 

Sloka 91.—If there is a slope towards the north, the 
ground is auspicious for Brahmins ; one towards the east, 
for Kshatriyas ; one towards the south, for Vaisyas; one 
towards the west, for Sudras. Others hold that Brahmins 
may dwell in any directon, and others according to their 
rank ; z.¢., Kshatriyas in ground inclined towards the east, 
south or west; Vaisyas towards south or west; Sudras 
towards the west alone. 


TaAsa cata area saltd gas aay | 
VIANA TAY TA TAA WN 


Sloka 92.—In the centre of the house-site, dig a pit, 
one cubit in diameter and depth. If,on filling it with 
the same earth, the pit is insufficiently filled, it is harmful; 


Adh. LIII. S). 98-95.] Prazreitseara: 449 


if just filled, moderate; and if the earth is more than 
sufficient, it brings fortune. 


TAMAS Taal AAA Bie stay | 
ASAT TY WATSTAIMsTA Bagiss 11S 
Sloka 93.—Or, fill the same pit with water and then 
walking a hundred steps, come back. If the water in the 
pit has not diminished, it is blest; similarly when an 
Adhaka of earth dug out weighs 64 palas. 


Oa TT Beta ae seafierarsag | 
saute (2 ae ae at yaaa aie Nei 


Sloka 94.—Or, place lamps inside unbaked earthen 
pots in the four quarters (within the pit). That quarter 
of the site in which the lamp burns longest is auspicious 
for the particular caste. 


qattd + qd Fea weaIAasganaTy 
aaa wala Yas WA | Bley wal TAA SKI 
Sloka 95.—Place flowers of the four colours assigned 
to the castes in the pit at night and observe them on the 
next day.’ That caste whose flower does not fade there, 
will flourish on the site; so also where one’s mind feels. 
happy. 
ay AA Wi: 
ar ue witar qAday WesaT | 
qet wt qaqa EMA Taraa: wv 
age qrata cigar qtaaaret: | 
ada’ @ gig: erstaara faaGar u 
asa ate falaequarseatxareany | 
quaeasaal aw Ble: BATA TIT 
qr eae aes ar alteg wae | 


450 geeatenraty [Adi SI, LIIL:96.99, 


Se ee mre RE RS REASONS ery ee AE Tee RSET ORES Tn mmamaaeappeitcay UNSERE TSAI 


atary ar Way A FAH ABATE OH 
VMUMeSad Alea Ay aa araag | 
aa al Way wa zivaadaqeay ti 

wet fal asaata Pat awa at war | 


frawetiagn fgiat saa yee: 
TTA WUT Tat Tawryqwraqqqgqaa: Al 


PITH WATS TURATTA BAT Fey | 
AN Tamil agwMMmarszsat FI UG! 

Slokas 96-97.—A soil that is white is good fos 
Brahmins ; one red, for Kshatriyas ; yellow, for Vaisyas ; 
and black, for Sudras. If it smells like ghee, blood, food 
and liquor, it is yood for the four classes taken in order. 
Similarly it is auspicious for these classes in their order 
if it is covered with holy grass, Sara, Durva and Kasa. 
Likewise, a sweet, astringent, sour and pungent earth 
bestows prosperity on these classes 

al SUT: 

AGU THAQEl Zana a at Age | 

SAWMIAN Aa TeNuAat 4 ar War il 

CENFG BUI FT aeaiiay Bar | 

THE MBM Ba Apa44i gs a wer ti 

afeasam aiiaieer gaiairaar 

waaea a agaat gaan sT.a 0 

Gea aman Heo Hs sraagar 

HAMA Bel Tear BAot SEB age 


Set eediat tiseqhat ara: waa 3 | 
WeIt Wal Dasla: Be ataeawies use 
ACTAAUBNSCTTARUAFAATTA | 
‘Saagat Heal aidiasaea Anta usu 


Adh, LITI. Sl. 100-104.] ‘facarattssara: 454%: 


anne _inmimninmeneemmnenmeennemmatl 


faa: wer ay aaa ata fraare |: 
TR: Wat eae HUSal TENA l12ooll 


Slokas 98-100,—The owner of lands should go at 

a time prescribed by an astrologer to a good piece of 
earth which is ploughed, where sown seeds have grown, 
and where Brahmins and cows have stayed for a night; 
worslfip deities with varieties of eatables, curds, coloured 
rice and fragrant flowers and incense ; and honour Brah- 
mins and the architects. Then touching his head, breast, 
thighs or feet according as he is a Bralimin, Kshatriya, 
Vaisya or Sudra, he should draw a line at the commence- 
ment of the construction of a house. 

ARORA FAM AMA MTSAT TAA | 

HABMAATT MIA ABTHAAIATA DAY lo Vl 

TAN VGA Sea aaaay | 

TAG TNA FT HBB Fa wWTIAT Neat 

AR TWalalaal WAIBAaT Sa = | 

c Co ba ean 

AAIFIMASA Sedat A RATATAT [Losi 

awarasafeiaat seta aeqey Paesai: | 

Na WT Bad FI VBA BATA Movil 

Slokas 101-104.—If he should draw the line with 

the thumb, middle finger or fore-finger, or with gold, 
gem, silver, pearl, curds, fruit, flower or coloured rice, it 
would lead to happiness ; if with a weapon, he would be 
killed by weapons ; if witha metal (or iron), imprisoned ; 
with ashes, will have danger from fire ; with straw, danger 
from thieves; with a wooden stick, fear of King. A 
crooked line drawn by foot gives danger from enemies 


452 * gyeeifignrera (Adh. LIL. Sl. 105-107 


ee i Pt 


Ae amen cement we wren ry mena a 


and misery; so is one that is imperceptible or ugly ; 
one drawn with hide, charcoal, bone or tooth, causes 
disaster to the owner; one drawn in an anti-clockwise 
direction, produces hatred; in a clockwise direction, pros- 
perity ; harsh words, spitting and sneezing at the com- 
mencement are said to be inauspicious. 


CAA ° Af. ABR 

agiatad Sa a caaa wala frat | 

HASTHARTUA: GF Alera TAT fH ay Fors 

tata ae agitate wes Tia TeATTT | 

awewaad aay Tasty frgaay oki 

Slokas 105-106.—When entering a finished or half- 

finished house, the architect should look for the sign 
such as where (in which part of the house-God) the 
owner is standing, and which limb he is touching. Ifa 
bird heated by the Sun, cries harshly at the time, it may 
be predicted that on the spot there is a bone of a mem- 
ber corresponding to the limb touched. 

The meaning of ‘heated by the Sun’ is—in the first watch 
of the day, the north-east is full of embers; the east is ‘scorched’, 
south-east, ‘smoky’, and the rest are calm; in the second watch, 
the east is ‘full of embers,’ south-east, ‘scorched’, south 
‘smoky’, and the rest calm; in the third, south-east, ‘full of 
embers’, south, ‘scorched’, south-west, smoky’, and the rest 
calm; in the last watch of the day, the south is ‘ full of embers’, 


south west, ‘ scorched’, west, ‘smoky’ and the rest, ‘calm’ ; and 
SO On. 


THATAASATS!Y ETATATASTMA | 
TAMAS aMAITHAHATTTT 1% ort 


Sloka 107.—Or, at the time of noting fore-tokens, if 
other animals such as elephants, horses and dogs being 
scorched by the Sun, produce a shrieking sound, it may 


Adb. LILI. Sl. 108-109.) firrarsitseaat; 433° 


be told that the specified spot contains a bone of sueh an 
animal and belonging to the limb corresponding to that 
touched by the owner. 


GA WAAAY Te AUasfeaTAAaS | 
TITMSoiyA a ax aes fAfreeay ie ecit 


Sloka 108.—The braying of an ass at the time of 
stretching the measuring string indicates the presence of 
a bone underneath. Similarly when the string is crossed 
by a dog or jackal, the same fault is to be predicted. 

fay aearat agageaeral zat at aes | 
ATAU Ba TETUahass ar oki 

Sloka 109.—If at that time, a bird sitting in a ‘ calm’ 
direction warbles sweetly, it is to be understood that 
there is a hidden treasure on the spot or in the limb, of 
the House-God occupied by the owner. 

aU WT: 


ANBIS WEqia: Btaay Gareua: | 
Peuy Gegagy sareign qarya7 1 
fadres waqfa: G4 qaneeed frag | 
aMaigeqrat Werat a Freaar: n 
camel Bq Herat zara s | 
ABM TTSESSY SCAM ATTMT: I 
dateaieua: aad ante gree waa 1 
CIVFAT WNT aM cara fafaigaa 
faaaqaia aa AaH TSA TAT | 
Tetya aa: Wea fad azq_ 
TA GTS WH Wal Bt Weriisie ary 
SB ar araat ar arsizgeragshy ar 
Gz At SAWAA ANA Terai | 
Tat ata aeea qatar aa: u 


A54 5, geceftararg [Adh, LIII.S). 110-115. 


nea 


Mae Ay AS BANGS very Tm: | 
WEUNTATA a CAAT DATTA 112 Lol 
Heqssgd Ase PoIaTisaatad Frwy | 
Hasty FT BATRA BURCTATA: 222 
Slokas 110-111.—If the string snaps, the owner will 
die; if apeg is driven upside down, fell disease will 
befall him; if the owner or carpenter forget anything, 
it indicates their death ; if the pot of water, ,while being 
brought, falls down from the shoulder, the owner will 
have some cerebral disease ; if it is drained away, there 
will be trouble to his family; if it is broken, the labour- 
ers will die : and if it falls from the hand, the owner will 


die. 
SAT WH Feat Tat Wat sacs | 
a: efor MEM AMeTTeaT: 223M 
SANTI: HAYUASTA: TACAea: | 
MEAMAT BA ZWSBA Aacag 223i 
Slokas 112-113,—In the north-eastern corner a 
worship should be performed with the necessary mate- 
rials and first of all, a stone laid there and then others in 
the other directions in a clockewise manner; similarly 
should be erected pillars carefully being decked with 
umbrellas, wreaths, cloths, incense and ointments. So 
also are doors to be raised. 
aur ST Ta: | 
fhendewasre g AuiagsHsq4ud | 
agaafa wats gat waa aa u 
addiona asata wy Tua a 
GST qaaa: aff: Sat ageiraaray un 


Aidh. LUI. Si. 214.) ‘ facaraitsvuiz: aks 


aaa @au ag sofa faiaata a | 

aiiea Gp sa SIN SH Tze kh 

alaawana wean qed farzart a | 

gait Hiwaess gga acai w 

yeasty ag qat gear Parva: | 

AA: WqEqan MBmeswg WEVA tt 

Waraniiza: Kar avenasa faeaaaq 1 

aaa Para Weagrrawe ta i 

TEAIAGAD: BUAGARUTA: | 

MBracaraqaeaiss fazer BAA: TIE u 

aaa aFzqaqnay aqraa gars ' 

Qt age ae array waat Te i 

Wy BSITTAe THA UTATAE | 

quit gai efi ae erale eaara i 

HT WiNagary Tarat UFAalaT | 

wa aaa ta ge wares waary o 
aaataaarge aaaeairada | 

TANTaAqd sa Fagsey Asya u 

TUsFTASAY Pista: AAT: Be | 

Tas Taras WHTATEASEA Ul 

ASAF ANA Wi FAUHTA: AAs 

ZWe ta WIVSeE Magi Wis: FE 
MAMATAGAATEAAMAE | 

RFAIDENAIAI CST AT yy 

Raamntiastauntraaagaas aa | 
URATITING Az7 afateaaeeq ie evi 
Sloka 114,.—When the pillars, etc., are mounted by 
birds and the like, when they shake, fall or are wrongly 
placed, the same effects have to be ‘predicted as for 


Indra's Banner. Vide-Adhyaya XLIII, Slokas 62-66, 
supra. - 


456 quediQarara, (Adh° LILI. Si. 115-119. 


MYR VTITIs FIT Tira | 

ae Tegal a ata wala Req eeu 
FSA WEE aa: aarafkagadeaq | 
URS Sz MATTISTA HAq Neen 


Slokas 115-116.—Ilf the house is elevated in the 
east or north, there will be loss of wealth and children; 
if there is stinking sme 1] there, loss of ason; if itis not 
straight, destru ction of kinsmen; and if it does not face 
any particular direction, no children will be born. If 
one wishes for the prosperity of a house, one ought to 
raise it to the same level on all sides. If at all there 
should be any fault, it should be either in the east or im 
the north. 

smaata faaat agua efacra ale ate: | 
Ss 
maar: wneehagisraary 12 Voi 

Sloka 117.—When the house has an elevation to- 
wards the east, the owner will be at loggerheads with 
his friends ; if towards the south, fear of death; if to 


wards the west, loss of wealth ; and if towards the . north, 
mental affliction. 


daeat tag werad ay HraaAzary | 
R e “, “~ 
THe AC TTHTIST AEA ATBTITT Ue Lei 
Sloka 118.—I{n a four-halled house, the chamber of 
worship should be situated in the north-east; kitchen in 
the south-east; the store-room in the south-west; and 
the treasure-room and granary in the north-west. 


aenize aed gaat: Aart gut sl 
Rina: aldled aeeq Aarenafaaa: 12291 


‘Adh, LIT. Sl. 120-123.) Pramratseara: 45% 


ee aa einen onl 


Sloka 119.—lIf there is water to the east, south-east, 
south, etc., of a house, there will be loss of children, 
danger ae fire, threat of enemy, quarrel among wo- 
men, frailty of women, penury, increase of wealth and 
prosperity of sons respectively. 


UHASTATATA HAAS TAMA AMT | 
aiereatadanreaatnasay Beg 128i 
Sloka 120.—For constructing a house, one ought to 
select trees other than those that are inhabited by birds, 
that are broken, withered, burnt, that are in temples, 


and burial grounds, milky trees, Dhava, Vibhitaka, Neem 
and Arani. 


tal Fates weleot SeATeA aay | 
TAYTHAUHAA A Meaisaseqaagt qiaa: 11222 


Sloka 121—A tree that is worshipped along with 
offeriigs the previous nivht, should be cut at day-time 
beginning with its north-eastern part. If it falls to the 
north or east, it is fortunate. One falling otherwise 
should be abandoned. | 


Al TAB Td? DH aw TERIA 
Gia & Wes MieaaTAeaAt stray 22 


AN 


Hag Wal aS ataisey aw: | 
ARs BAG I YRS BRT 122. 


_ Slokas 122-123.—If the cutting appears natural, the 
timber is good for being used fora house; if there is a 
yellowish circle in the cross section of the tree, it is to be 
predicted that there is a lizard inside the tree; if a 
madder-coloured circle, a frog; if a bluish one, a'snake . 

i. a. 58 


458 , gse-atgarara (LILI. 124-125, LIV, 1-9, 


ae nd meee ot ett ele entreene -t heme ar eee ee nr oe aim Phe 


if a red one, a blood-sucker; if a green-gram-like one, 
a stone; and if a tawny one, a rat; andif a swordelike 
one, water. 
qeaTTVeEaageat a aight acag7zag | 
arate A a aa aa aa: Hass 12 Vvll 

Sloka 124.—One wishing for prosperity ought not 
to sleep above grains, cows, elders, fire and deitics; nor 
along the diagonals, nor with the head turned towards 
the north or west, nor naked, nor with wet feet 
akgntar aaret daresay | 
CIMATNS Aaa MAT TNATT AIT Tey U2 

Sloka 125.—One ought to enter a house which is 
strewn with an abundance of flowers, decked with arches, 
embellished with pots filled with water, where the deities 
are worshipped with incense, perfumes and oblations and 
which is reverberating with the sound of Brahmins 
chanting Vedas. 

By the word Haz is meant the Gods inside the 41% aud not 
those that are situated in the outer compartments. 


Thus ends the 53rd Adhy.ya on ° House-building’. 


a 


TRASHY (*8ll On the Exploration of Water Springs 


GET TTS F AMIS THAMS Aa AVIS/Sas | 
gat aaieg Rada Ryarait sieqaamaen: 2K 
Cet Wa Ta AAG AAR TqANTITN | 
anal Talat a ad wed Magers zh 


Adh. LIV. SI. 3-6.] -ag:aaaratrseara: 459 


Slokas 1-2.—I shall now explain the science of 
‘ Water-finding ’ which leads to religious merit and re- 
nown, for, it helps men to ascertain the existence of water. 
Just as there are veins in the human body, even so do 
they exist, some higher up, others lower down, in the 
earth. The water that falls from the sky with the same 
colour and taste, assumes various colours and tastes owing 
to the difference in the nature of tne earth. Hence it 
should be examined in relation to its environments. 


THEA ASATMAA ATTA TAFT Ta: 
faatasan: BAT: TWeAatat Rat gaa: 13H 
feaqftasar a it aaai aed aaiucacat | 
Taal seAs aM Arasat arala afar vit 
TAUSISAAT YBa Adiag aaar ae | 
Hegent a gan Areafaaaeaa aes 4 


Slokas 3-5.—The divine lords of the eight quarters 
beginning with the cast are in their order, Indra, Agni, 
Yama; Nirriti (demon), Varuna, Wind, the Moon and 
Siva. The veins in the different quarters are known 
by the names of their respective lords. There is a ninth, 
called ‘ The Great Vein’, in the middle of these. There 
are hundreds of veins branching off from these and 
bearing distinct appellations. A ‘vein that comes up 
from the nether world is good ; so are those in the fonr 
directions. But those in the intermediate quarters are 
not'auspicious. Hereafter I shall explain the character- 
istics of the veins. 


aX Aaaiscqrea 2 eae: TaN | 
aed TOT ae Tals Het sae: Ta HAN 


460 geaigarara [Adh. LIV. Sl. 7-10. - 


Fagalt araged aoga: wegiisy aq aan | 
GearHy TAT TWIT Aaa AAMT (9! 


Slokas 6-7.-—Jf roting (tree) is scen flourishing in 
a waterless tract, there wil] be water at a depth of 7$ 
cubits at a distance of 3 cubits to the west of the tree. 
There will be found a westerly vein flowing underneath. 
At a depth of 23 cubits, the symptoms would be a pale 
white frog; thereafter, yellow clay, and further, a very 
hard stone (which will break only by the application of 
vreat heat) and underneath that there will be water. 

Man's height is 120 digits or 5 cubits. 


area: erat asa Tat | 
ABEMCTH WET A YSIST AER! ici 
Sloka 8.---In a similar tract, if a Jambu tree is found, 
an easterly vein will be obtained at a depth of ten cubits 
at a distance of three cubits to its north. The signs. are, 
the earth smelling like iron at a depth of five cubits; 
next, pale-white clay, and further, a frog. 


WII Wena we aIq adicen: | 

aeneans Ts Fess Bg Sh 

HATH FT ACA GTA AT VTE: 

aga aa aig det Hs a Ty aay Noll 

Slokas 9-10.—If there is an ant-hill nearby to the 

east of a Jambu tree, there will be sweet water at a depth 
of ten cubits at a distance of three cubits to the south of 
the tree. When the earth is dug 2} cubits deep, there 
will be found fish; next astone with the colour of a 


dove ; and next elie clay. Here there will be plenty of 
water for a long time. 


Adh, L LIV. SI. 11-15.] sg:9 qmNei stare: 461." 
A AN sat ~e 
CUTTER PAT BeawTzy avs 7 
gay frdisigraqiaaraaisa: Fare awe eet 
Sloia 11.—If there is an Indian Fig tree in a water- 
less tract (with or without an ant-hill thereby), there will 
be a vein of good water at a distance of only three cubits 
to its west and at a depth of 12} cubits. Here, the 


signs are a white snake at a depth of five cubits and 
further a stone as dark as collyrium. 


SWMBAG TAA aetlal aie aaisqargar: | 


fafaeeg wai qeiiaiacaaaterd: qa UWA 
Rat Wasa FS AGA Ta FT| 
dat faa aftaar aat ae farieaehraq 123i 


Slokas 12-13. - If there be an ant-hill to the north 
of an Arjuna tree, there would be water at a depth of 
173 cubits, at a distance of three cubits to its west. When 
the earth is dug 234 cubits deep, there will be a white 
lizard ; then ata depth of five cubits, grey clay; then 
dark, then yellow, then white, and then sandy earth, 
Beneath that, abundant water is to be predicted. | 


vedierivarat fdveut cya aaa: | 
FOIA ATs Aig As vale sassy uel 
WaAeaissae WA BlIst WT Tay Twas | 
fimat TaRtIse BACT TA ATTA IAN 
Slokas 14-15.—There will be sweet and never-fail- 
ing water at a depth of 114 cubits at a distance 3 cubits 
to the south of a Nirgundi (Indigo) tree with an ant-hilf 
nearby. At a depth of 23 cubits, there will be red fish;: 
then, red brown clay ; further, pale-white clay ; then, sand’ 
mixed with gravel; beneath that, there will be water. <° 


462° ? aeeaitarary [Adh LIV. SI. 16-20 


a dae aa 


qin aft ATA TSHR CITT TS TANT | 
Guifaaaet Fat DeaaRyAar 128 
Sloka 16—When an ant-bpill is seen to the east of 
a Jujube tree, water is to be declared at a depth of 15 
cubits at a distance of 3 cubits to its west When the 
earth is ‘dug 23 cubits, a white lizard will be found. 
AIST Tad Besrwat aat ws aala | 
GUTTA GVIsT aT Tea AST 291 
Stoka 17,.—If a Jujube tree is seen along with a 
Palasa tree, water will be found at a depth of 154 cubits 


at a distance of 8 cubits to its west. Ata depth of 6 
cubits, the sign will be a non-poisonous snake. 


faeaigeazaia frar7 eat q Ara | 
GuiaiaTey AIG SMSAL T WER! Nei 
Sloka 18.—There will be water at a depth of 15 
cubits at a distance of 3 cubits to the south of a place 
where a Bilwa and an Indian fig tree are together. The 
sign at a depth of 23 cubits is a black frog. 
mralgraarat acai caad aT alzaq | 
~ GOTT aae TaRieser aes at a ean 
MUSK TAIN was TTT: | 
«Gene gqatrat efece gant ara Roll 
-Slokas 19-20.—If an ant-hill is seen near a Kako- 
dumbara tree, there will be 2 westerly water vein flowing 
at a depth 164 cubits. The signs are pale yellow clay 


and jwhite stone; andat a depth of 2} cubits a lily- 
coloured white rat will greet the eyes, . 


Adh. LIV, SI. 21-26.] sq:tareitsvara: 498 


TSU BA Tai BRIG WI TIT | 
qsat geaiaay sara Catt sean Ta UR 
< g lan a 
WH BCISAIN RTA TATA TARA | 
A AUETH ACAR TST A TANT UVM 
Slokas 21-22.—When a Kampillaki tree isseen ina 
waterless tract, there will be a southerly water-vein flow- 
ing at a depth of 16} cubils at a distance of 3 cybits to 
the east of it The signs are blue clay, then lily-coloured, 
and further dove-coloured clay ; anc further, at a depth 
of one cubit, there will be a fish with the smell of goat, 
and beneath that, a little brackish water. 


MAM RAIUAL A At HUTA RET 
HAI AA ATT Al FeIaAaTsal Haig Vwi 
Sloka 23.--Tshere is a water-vein called Kurnuda, 


which flows at a depth of 15 cubits and at a distance of 
two oubits to the north-west of a Sonaka tree, 
MTs Teain sang Aalapea aie | 
ery wate Raa ger gar Pe areag een 
Sloka 24.—If there is an ant-hill nearby to the 
south of a Vibhitaka trce, there will be a water-vein- at 
a depth of 7% cubits at a distance of 2 cubits to its east, 
ba 7; . ws als 
TAT TAT ei aeatey Agr wAgA 


aaiaaaata Ri aaticariey: Teas I Rou 
Tal arataH: 14g TET g BEAU AISRAT 


aaa Bhat a Pret asaty adaasata R&I 
Slokas 25-26.—\When the ant-hill is to the west of 
the same tree, there will be a water-vein at a depth of 
22) cubits at a distance of a cubit tu its. north,. The 


#64 deetfyarara, ([Adh. LIV. Si. 27-32, 


signs are a white scorpion (?) at a depth of 5 cubits, then 
a crimson stone; then to the west flowsa vein. This 
vein will disappear after three years. 


agaiad caeat aeatar aa afaziza | 
AY aM AATAMT TTT Ro 

TAA FST BRT: BAVtaya Aet THT 
Hoteas WNAReaaiay ReaNy Neel! 

Slokas 27-28.~ If there is an ant-hill darkened by 
holy grass to the north-east of a Kovidir. tree, there will 
be undrying water at a depth af 22} cubits between the 
tree and the ant-hill. The signs mentioned are: a snake 


of the colour of a lotus-calix at a depth of 5 cubits; red 
earth and a coryndon stone. 


Cp ral on 
vig aaid agit aediagaaqa dag | 
asd ee qataerea waa PR Wes. 
Goal WER aitat atiaaarya qa | 
TUT RTA: ae a Hua galeqazar Zell 
Slokas 29-30. —If a Saptaparna tree is surrounded by 
an ant-hill, water is to be declared at a depth ef 25 
cubits at a distance of one cubit to the north of it. The 
signs are: a grean frog at a depth of 23 cubits, the earth 
resembling yellow orpiment, a stone dark like the cloud, 
and beneath that, a northerly vein carrying good water, 


aaat aang: Raa) agit sat £84: | 

| ANAS TT Bahia: ged 1321 
OY & aaa Agel aiet aediiter aa: Gar |. 
AQAAIAGT TN THVT GT Bz: 


Adh, LIV. SI. 33-37.]  aq:amarettssara: 465 


Slokas 3I-382.—When a frog is seen at the foot of 
any tree, there will be water at a depth of 22} cubits at 
a distance of one cubit to itsnorthe The signs are: a 
mongoose at a depth of 5 cubits, then blue clay, yellow, 
then white clay and next a stone of the shape of a frog. 


qararisal eaal gama: aia: BA | 

Sasa FT aa Geass ra ard 33H 

HST JUS TUN Aiigaa Are gar | 

TAVEA AMIFASl giassasMaAMiay Fev 

Slokas 33-84.—lf there is an ant-hill to the south of 

a Karanja tree, there will be a water-vein at a depth of 
17: cubits ata distance of 2 cubits to its south. The 
signs are: a tortoise at a depth of 23 cubits; there will 
first of all appear an easterly vein, then a northerly vein 


containing sweet water; then a green stone below; under- 
neath that, there will be water. 


* aaa weReieiwa: TAA ae | 
ahem wa seMAaeateny TAT Nk 
AUT Fos Yat aal Focaaaissar | 
meat wale faa aaa ade aat aiaq 131 
Slokas 35-36.—If there be an antehill to the north of 
a Madhuka tree, there will be water at a depth of 37} 
cubits at a distance of 5 cubits to the west of the tree. 
The signs are: first, a big serpent at a depth of 5 cubits, 
then tawny clay, a stone of the colour of horse gram; 


next, there will be an easterly vein, carrying always. 
foamy water. 


avin: feral afyaa fone agaaaq i 
Ter gated Ry arqrat fe wt UR 


_ §. G59 


466 geeditarag = [Adh. LIV.SI. 38-42. 


Tt RO TOOT RR ne ek ee eee 


ner ole i meetiniteearameaneh tienen bniain ie neinanetememenemet anna eed a2 a erat ane! 


Sloka 37,.—If there be a glossy ant-hill covered with 
holy grass and Durva to the south of a Tilaka tree, there . 


an. 


cubits to the west of the tree. The vein there is an 
easterly one. 

AVA: GIA BAIA sada TI | 

Weal ceiraaa ae: gereadiaia: Ri 


Blatt wir Rr aaa ae Benes aaleaq | 
SAHA WER AT Alea tat 2S 


Slokas 38-389,—1f there be an ant-hill to the west of 
a Kadamba tree, there will be a northerly vein, carrying 
inexhaustible water with the smell of iron at a depth of 
283 cubits at a distance of 3 cubits to the south of the 
tree. The signs are: a gold-hued frog at a depth of 5 
cubits; and next, yeliow-clay. 


TABATA AWE Ts a vale AWisRA aT L. 
ba Cn os 
Tag TeeRaeaAia: FIT BAT Melt 
Sloku 40.—If a palm tree or a cocoanut tree is 
found covered with ant-hills, there will be a southerly 


water-vein at a depth of 20 cubits at a distance of 6 
cubits to the west of the tree. 


wray RUA AaTTAZEIAS TTY | 
AAUNGST UY Weal FONT TS TT UV 
HATHA FHT HOT Aegeiaaes TTI | 
AA MNT: Pe aaalaT Aas WEAN 


Slokas 41-42,-—If there be an ant-hill to the south 
of a wood-apple tree, there will be water at a depth of 
25 cubits at a distance of 7 cubits to the north of the 


Adh. LIV. Sl. 43.48.] aq:qaaratrseara: 467 


ere Es PT TPA ASSP PS BPA AIEEE ACE 
es an ay PLAC CPA A APNE A SA AP IT OSES PONE DTT CarPC BEA 


tree. The signs will be; a spotted snake at a depth of 
5 cubits, then, black clays; a hard stone, next white clay ; 
then there will be a westerly vein and next, a northerly 
one, 

AWMCATKA WA Tail al TIqASHelawal TW | 

TeMSTH TA Re AT Fay Faq val 

HU AAT TOY TTT yau alana aq | 

mat a fru area qatazal fkdiar a uve 

Slokas 43-44 —lf there be an ant-hill or a Jujube 


water 173 cubits down and 6 cubits to ihe north of the 
tree ;; the signs will be: a tortoise in the first layer (5 
cubits deep), then brown stone, next, clay with sand; 
then first of all a southerly vein and next, a north- 
easterly one. 


ama shaalaediaaas wala ct | 
" geared aad: gitas qeafraala es 
aist Bsa: FSI Bq Frat ATHAITAATTAT | 
SN ys NIA areal Hye aaa wes 
Slokas 415-46.—If there is an ant-hill to the north of 
a Haridra tree, there will be water 287 cubits down and 
3 cubits to its east, The signs are: a blue snake in the 
first instance, next, yellow clay, then, an emerald-like 


stone, next black earth, then first a westerly vein and 
next a southerly one. 


warieel aa Tera Prana | 

Hoga weag at aay TS Fey vel 

ara Raat cet garnet @ wea Qa | | 
TAASR FT eATASTY ay AA: gee: Hech © 


468 _ BeRaearary [Adh. SI. LIV. 49.52. 


A a TI i ate LES eet an eyent: te em ne rate at meatal cherthinl tense dante entenen d 


Slokas 47. 48, lf in awaterless place are seen the 
characteristics of a watery tract or soft Virana grass or 
Durva, water will be available at 5 cubits below the earth; 
or if a kind of brinjal, Trivrita (Fa ges), Nagadanti, Su- 
karapadi, Lakshmana and Navamalika Creeper bea found 
to be growing, water will be found at 15 cubits below 
the earth andtwo cubits to the south. 


Ravan: ATHAYA TAATHTZA THIS | 


AI AIIM SAA ASA Ara Vil 


Sloka 49.—Those trees which are glossy, have long 
branches hanging down, are very short and extensive 
have water nearby; whereas hollow and rough trees 
with shattered leaves do not indicate water in the 
neighbourhood. 


ASRAATRAIVT RAGA A TATHS TT: | 
eens TA ATATS Wot 
ua aft afara aedie: sRaaaaaag | 
stl@hiemaaataeda avr 42H 


Slokas 50-51.—\f Titaka, Amrataka, Varunaka, 
Bhallataka, Bilwa, Tinduka, Ankola, Pindara, Sirisha, 
Anjana, Parushaka, Vanjula and Atibala are very glossy 
and covered with ant-hills, there will be water 3 cubits 
from there to the north at a depth of 22} cubits. 


FAN AIM Tay sat goraisar wet az | 
alarg Pau aiear aemed ac at AAT GM 


Sloka 52.—If in a grassless place, a patch of ground 
is seen covered with grass, orin a grassy place, one is 
seen without it, a vein of water or treasure is to be 
declared to exist there. 


yoy 


Adh. LIV. SI. 53-57.) SY Ta Seara: | 459 


in liteminemeatameatinanahememnede ime emcee enema tances ae 


RagqqeHiat Saeaseaaa: Ke: TAT | 
Gear Geraaa aA Fat a Ara Au 
Sloka 53.—When a thorny tree flourishes in the 
midst of non-thorny trees or vice versa, there is a trea- 
Sure or water at a depth of 182 cubits at a distance of 
3 cubits to the west. 
acid at Te afeawned ae aeq | 
aigtanaga: Beal aa a Pe ag wae 
Sloka 54,—Where the earth being stamped by feet 
emits a loud sound, a northerly water-vein will be found 
there at 173 cubits. 
THAR Tear we Raa vals wee a arg 
frqraea qrearas ae BySt Grea Ue4I! 
Sloka 55.—Where a single branch of ajtree hangs 


low or is colourless, it is to be understood that water 
existsat a depth of 15 cubits under the branch, 


HOSIMAH Ta ae Ts Aree HTasas | 
Wala TSIIAA: wranotisea: far west 
Sloka 56.—Where the fruits and flowers of a tree 
are unnatural, a water-vein flows at adepth of 20 cubits 
ata distance of 3 cubits to the east. The signs are: 
stone below and yellow earth. 
aig woemriter Beata esq Pa: Gade | 
TAlMasey TT HTT FT I 
Sloka 57.—If a Kantakari (Brinjal ?) is seen ‘without 


thorns but with white flowers, there will be ‘water ‘under 
neath it at 174 cubits. eal 


470 - geeaigarara (Adh. LIV. Sl. 58.62. 


De eeunemeen aaron tadeanatean nreaee deans io ditasen bin anthinnatmatens neleniechenineanaed 


aati Breen a7 ainesahsa 33 |. 
Tan Wana faded Pgetae scl 
Sloka 58.—Where in a_ waterless place there is a 
date tree with two tops, water has to be declared to its 
west at 15 cubits. 
ait ana aitiat: Ragga: aq Ieraga’ a | 
asda TA TATASeY Gera Hala lS 


Sloka 59.—If{ a Karnikara or Palasa tree bears white 
flowers, there is water two cubits to the south at a depth 
of ten cubits. 


TAA AMA YH A aT ae aga | 
Peeer a AU AEA Teas ING ol 


Sloka 60.—Where the ground steams or smokes, 
there is water at 10 cubits; and it may be stated that 
the vein will yield an abundant supply of water. 


aagq aaa ad ae Raragaana | 
Paraaaaregye ar Aaihae ATTA TT 142i 
Sloka 61.—Where, in the region of a field, the crops 


‘that have grown perish, or there is glossy and very white 
vegetation, there is a great vein at 10 cubits. 


Thus have been stated the symptoms of water in jungle and 
watery regions. 


Bea Hala PU aqr sata: Te AaTKATIA | 
aiat acarmiaa yauden: Re area 1G 8 
Sloka 62.—Now I shall expound the possibilities of 
veins in desert regions. The water-veins run below the 


earth’s surface in the shape of camels’ necks (¢. e. 
syphons.) | 


SESE LEME TERE 


4 


Adh. LIV. SI}. 63- 68. ] ATTMAANSe Ia: 471 


Reece ENTE A AGA Sten NI EEL ES RON EAE ELLER OO SERETEARS WERESTEEREL A cartes aE LLeMp See 


Gara aa aeatar as wala aaa | 
sauna a re faa cays ges: all 

Fag aex mat aealter aqt aagita | 

WaT TF FeIsaissay aa Taseay Bagsayq |e vill 


Slokas 63-64.—If there is an ant-hill to the north- 
east of a Peelu tree, there will be water to its west. The 
vein will run in a northerly direction at a depth of 25 
enbits. The signs would be : in the first instance a frog, 
brown clay, then green clay, then below, a stone and 
under that water. 


gists meat qenilaisdsaaayeet: | 
fete arearat ata awmea AAA: gee Syl 
Tah Ge yam: Maan saws | 
afanat vata Rae aan ait qatay Nea 
Slokas 65-66. If the ant-hill is to the east of the 
Peelu tree, there will be water 4} cubits to the south at 
a depth of 35cubits. The signs will be: in the first 
imstance there will be, at a distance of 5 cubits, a white 
and dark snake of only one cubit length; to its south 
flows a vein with plenty of brackish water. 
TATA wiiranee aaa aes Mg | 
Tala: THAT Gey dlalsaT wees: lgol 
Sloka 67,.—If there is an ant-hill to the north of a 
tender bamboo, there is sweet water to its south at a 
depth of 50 cubits. When the earth is dug 5 cubits, a 
yellow frog will be seen, 
teases qari: Beaea 
SIT TOU ATT Teer THT AT NRC” 


472 , qesigatarg [Adh. LIV. SL. 69-23. 


bslomemnieadnastatsldamehtnat bebebaseineeh tn eiinanmancatendedadenttehitad enneemaetmaaietamammesimaanidebaiitennnn immnes teaentnaaen ae aetaecacetameminrenie amines enaienrnaa lane daieieteamteneeasremtamiediercanen_sanasremunmamateenae nt aaneemaneetiadniamatnineadl 


Sloka 68.—[ there isan ant-hill to , the west of a 
Rohitaka tree, three cubits to its west, there is a vein of 
brackish water flowing to the west ata depth of 60 cubits. 

segadlaenint wsesa: ya re ee | 
lA FAA AT BIST Arar aL WTA 189i 

Sloka 69,—If the ant-hill isto the east of an Indra 
_tree, there is a vein one cubit to its west at a depth of 


70 cubits. The sign is a brown lizard in the first layer 
of 5 cubits. 


iz A BWIMARMUAIIAa UTFTTT | 

SALT I WET TATAATIATTASTY |hoolt 

a TaST AFSSHATAT TAAATATAAT | 

TH Waals aaa seh He sero TT 192i 

Slokas 70-71.—If there is an ant-hill to the north of 

a golden tree, there is water two cubits to the south at 
a depth of 75 cubits. The water here will be brackish. 
When thejearth is dug 23 cubits, there will be a mon- 
goose ; next, copperscoloured stone; then, red earth ; then 
there flows a pouch vein. 

walaitaga atgal Veans aeding | 

ERATASTA NT NEAAAITATA N92 » 


qr saat agen Are ahs aatorear 
fetta: cee aq dar afaatsday 98 
Slokas72-73.—If a Jujube tree and a Rohita tree are 

joined together with or without an ant-hill nearby, there is 
water three cubits to the west at at a depth of 80 cubits. 
The water will be tasty. At fiirst, a southerly vein flows, 
then a northerly one, next, a stone resmbling a paste, 
nex white clay ; at 24; cubits, a scorpion will be seen. 


Adh. LIV. SI. 74-79.] aa:qaarattsvarz: 473 


aH Axe Bia we: Waaa aaEA | 
AMAA Geta WAST FT lvl 
Stoka 74.—If a Jujube tree is joined with bamboo, 


there is water 3 cubits to the west at a depth of 90 cubits. 
The vein is a north-easterly one with abundant water. 


diganat aad eearaarena fei asa I 
AAA FIUTMIAIAEAsaA AGT Well 
Sloka 75.—lf a Juiabe tree is seen in combination 
with a Peelu tree, there is inexhaustible water, but brack- 
ish, 3 cubits to the east at a depth of 109 cubits. 
HHFABMITA ATA as BEATS aT i 
saaastA WAT, Tala isk 
Sloka 76.--\Vhen Kakubha and bamboo trees or 


Kakubha and Bilwa trees are joined together, there is 
water two cubits to the west at a depth of 125 cubits. 


Ee ae zal SF HATA TSI: aia | 

HT qey ea} TURF ATH TAI CH 

Sloka 77 —When there is pale-white Durva or holy 
erass on the top of an ant-hill, a well should be sunk in 
its middle. Here there is wacer at a depth of 105 cubits, 

yins BaeaTHAa Teale Ga CHIT Tl | 

qugaa VET ALAS TATA 9c 


Sloka 78.—If, in a place full of Kadamba trees, 
Durva grass is seen on an ant-hill, there is water 2 cubits 
to the south at a depth of 125 cubits. 


TABTIALA THTTHUTT Ft wala | 
TATA? AANAAAS TT THIET [ott 


z. a. 60 


474 queaftarara, [Adh LIV. SI. 80-84. 


AAI FEAT TEAM ASIA | 


acaihaegeagy Veassqisa: Bret ala iicoll 
Slokas 79-80.—When there is a Rohitaka tree sur- 
rounded by three trees of different types in the midst of 
three ant-hills, water is to be predicted there. The 
water is four cubitsand 16 digits to the north of the 
centre of the ant-hills at a depth of 200 cubits. First 
a stone will be seen and beneath that a water-vein. 


aeqrgU aay wal waa adie: | 
Gal WRU PAIASAA: Tsay le il 


Sloka 81.—Where there is a knotty Samee_tree and 
anant-hill to its north, there is water 5 cubits to the 
west at a depth of 250 cubits. 


CHA TA AT AeA ATA! AISA | 
alaa (i aes avert waralseaat He Vl 


Sloka 82,—When there are five ant-hills in a place 
and the central one is white, there is a vein underneath 
the middle one at a depth of 275 cubits. 


ATA AT DA WAAMTSTy Haas THAT | 
maqaiste: wad aayaer Maas: Ne 
Sloia 83.—Where a Samee tree is combined with 
a Palasa, there is water 5 cubits to its west at a depth of 
300 cubits. When the earth is dug 2% cubits deep, first, a 


snake will be seen, and next, yellow clay mixed with 
gravel. 


TAisst Waa? Aal Telaw wraeay | 


TaN SAAT AAT Aaa cv 


Adh. LIV. S). 85-89.) 3a:vaireitseara: 475 


Sloka 84.—-Where there is a white Rohitaka tree 
surrounded by an ant-hill, there is water one cubit to the 
east at a depth of 350 cubits. 


TM PTHACT TT Tat Ata aT Tr | 
AIAPATTT AHANSATG J cdl 


Sloka 85.—-Where there is a white Samee tree full 
of thorns, there is water one cubit to its south at.a 
depth of 375 cubits. At a depth of 21 cubits, there will 
be a snake. 


AN ~_¢ A A Ce aN 
AVA BE A Tie ads itesaq | 
APPTATTA FSM aa fae: nck 
Sloka 86.~—The existence of water in a forest tract 
may not be determined on such indications as apply to 
a desert. The characteristics mentioned, wz-, Jambu 
Vetasa, etc., in waterless tracts, if seen in deserts, water 


should be declared to exist there at twice the depth 
mentioned. 


arqtaga ae Rrgand anita frat saat | 
fiery aeet sarienal mesta cll 
aMicHATMNSsAaala Galas | 
aedlnrgaraiara: HeRaget Tay lec! 

Slokas 87-88.—If a Jambu tree, Trivrit, Maurvi, 


Sisumari, Sariva, Siva, Syama, Varahi, Jyotishmatee, 
Garudadhvaja, Sukarika, Mashaparnee and Vyaghra- 
pada creepers grow by an ant-hill, there is water three 
cubits to the north of it at a depth of 15 cubits. 


RIgTl AST ATMA | Tales Get: | 
wata fMaMEeT Ta Hat le 


476 geeaftararg [Adh. LIV. S]. 90-94. 


emcee comes Haha rine reiacrnee en 


Sloka 89.—-The above measures apply only to 
watery tracts; but in a forest region, the depth should 
be 25 cubits. If there be the same indications in a 
desert, water might be seen at a depth of 35 cubits. 


UHAA AT ASl WaAyaeniayentelal |: 
aati aa fant wala aiisat aS FT Noll 


Sloka 90.—Where some ground, otherwise uniform 
and devoid of grass, trees, ant-hills and bushes, con- 
tains a piece of unusual appearance, there is water at 
a depth of 25 cubits. 


aa fava at Aas Atgatizat at ara | 
AATATABAT Alas TAMAS aT Sen 
Sloka 91.—Where the earth is soft, low, sandy and 
emitting sound, there is water at a depth of 225 or 25 
cubits, 
Raaaent aa aerate ya 
TVUTASHT (AHA AACA ase Tq UsVW"! 
Sloka 92.—There will be plenty of water at 20 
cubits to the south of smooth trees. The same may be 
said when a tree in the midst of a thick wood shows un- 
common symptoms, 


aaa a7 altal ala FeISeT SIROTA | 


Riel Al aT aera TaSeT TANT SR 
Sloka 93.—Where in a forest or watery tract the 
earth goes down being trodden upon, or where numerous 
insects are seen without theirabode, there is water at 
a depth of 73 cubits. 


ST Bla a aei Pialonsahanarac: ara: | 
WRATH aT Teatat al AEA SVM 


Adh. LIV, Sl. 95-99.] aq:eansitsvara: 477 


eee tap ge rapt POR UTES 


at eerie a sheila “opment eames earasterter timer ene Prine amolimapiarithain, pgasniitt 
e 


Sloka 94.—~An isolated cold spot ina warm ground 
denotes cold water; an isolated warm spot in a cold 
ground, warm water at a depth of 174 cubits and at 4 
cubits’ distance, if a rainbow, fish or ant-hill is seen. 


awniniat weeut aeraisegiesa: Bru azas | 
Wala A Ved a aa Tai a ata: 1S4il 
Sloka 95.—If, in a row of ant-hills, one is taller than 
the rest, there isa vein underneath that;. and where 


vegetation that has grown withers away or does not 
sprout at all, there is water at a distance of four cubits. 


FAMATHAGEAL: AAAUAMIS ATA: | 
qetacqaaaay assed A Wee eit 
Sloka 96.— Where a banyan, Palasa and Indian Fig 
tree, or a banyan and a lippala tree are found together; 
there is water underneath them at 3 cubits’ distance. 
The vein lies northward. 
MAY BS By WAS GTA al WAT HI | 
aat a His Aa Ts FT AAT AAs Ail 
ARAB TeIt ay aay | aTey | 
RRAIAAIVIFT AUT WATE FATs Ac 
Slokas 97-98,—If there be a well to the south-east 
of a village or town, it would mostly cause constant fear, 
and danger from fireto men. If itis situated in the 
south-west, it causes loss of children; if in the north- 


west, it threatens the wife; wells in directions other 
than these three are productive of beneficial results. 


ANA Brat THAS.Aq Si TATSTT | 
AA HAITI AAat aes Ast 


478 -  quedt@ararg (Adh. LIV. Si. 100-103. 


Sloka 99.—Thus have I treated of the subject of 
water-finding in verses composed in the wat metre, 
having gone through the work on the subject written by 
sage Saraswata. Now I shall explain the same subject 
in Ja metre as taught by sage Manu. 


frat aa: Teena Rocce aa: Area | 
TEAUAHST: AYE HA FAT a AHR AS! aT Il 


agareTyataat: ey: elefeaar aT gANeHABT: | 
SANAT PATA: ABTA aes 208i 
fadiagr ar azafeanr ar vata ater geqazasea: | 


MAAN WANHIAINT YS FOTTISEA 1% oll 

Slokas 100-102.—A water vein will be found at a 
depth of 15 cubits in a place where trees, shrubs and 
creepers are smooth and densely covered with leaves, 
where lotus, Gokshura, Usira (Gau_yGar) and Kula or 
Gundra grass, Kusa, Darbha, Nalikaor Nala grows. 
Where date-trees, Jambu, Arjuna and Vetasa or milky 
trees, shrubs and creepers or mushrooms, Hastikarna, 
Nagakesara, lotus, Kadamba, Karaja and Sinduwara 
trees grow, or wherevthere is Vibhitaka or Madayantika, 
there is water at 15 cubits. So also in a place where 
there is one mountain upon another 


qs may be interpreted as at the foot of the lower mountain 
or upper mountain.” 


al Wie: mragae awl diet a TIT abe ql. 


Tat WA BA FT AMT HOA TT FT THAT 2 od 
Sloka 108—There is plenty of sweet water in a 
place which is full of Munja grass, reeds and holy grass, 


where the earth is blue-and mixed with pebbles, and 
where the earth is black or red. 


Adh. LIV. SI. 104-108.] eg:qaaraitseara; 479 


PA teen Pa eer CAAT SENATE BID Se nen REPRESS RS ae enim gy Sa CELSO ASSO AIST A 4 LS HN Se sO A SENS emer SAMO 


BIRT BARA BUA AN weat sitar BAe | 

MINyUa SAT Weg Be sar alsrgeatrany lif vil 
Sloka 104.—A copper-coloured earth mixed with 

gravel will yield water of an astringent taste; red-brown 


earth, brackish water; a pale white ground produces salt 
water ; and blue earth, sweet water. 


AEITEMgenaeraa: awateraaqads |  — 

foie wiguqeaten Sara qsta Magaiea ik ol 

\/ Sloka 105.—Saka, Aswakarna, Arjuna, Bilwasarja, 
Sriparni, Arishta, Dhava and Simsapa trees, other trees, 


shrubs and creepers being coarse and having leaves full 
of holes, indicate the existence of water far off. 


CAMATTATAIT at Psa at away AT | 
WRT Pega BAT WHT IT BAoaTaIsaT: (1% 4A 
- Sloka 106 —A piece of earth that has the colour of 
the Sun, fire, ashes, camel or donkey is declared to be 
water-less. Where bamboo sprouts are red and milky 
and the earth red, there is water underneath a stone. 
AAQRPIAIHAT WHYS STITATAT aT | 
ARIAT Bstaa ar Tat Mar yfairarar lle ow! 
Sloka 107.— Also a stone or rock that resembles bery], 
ereen-gram, cloud, dark gem, ripe fig, bee or collyrium, 
or is brown, has got abundant water nearby. 
CTAARGMTA Bt ata Ta y ger | 
Tl AMAT AMAT ACAY TWA FVAseaa F WLocit 
Sloka 108—A rock which resembles in colour a 


pigeon, honey, ghee, silken cloth or some creeper, yields 
soon inexhaustible water. 


480 " queeifigarareg (Adh. LIV. Adh. 109-112. 


ae einetammespenetaan nated I eae ahepenbertiennennionasneeedinen Lnaditnhenntonenmnaeenaheamemiemmmbahemenammnmanaradl 


TIA AMAT TMA TIgAEMSATTST | 
ARTATR ARAM THT aT AAT | PIet FataT Ny ost 


Sloka 109.—A rock that is filled with red or varie- 
gated spots, that is pale white or has the colour of ashes, 
camels, donkeys, the Sun, fire, bee or the flower of 
Augushtika creeper is without any water nearby. 


SPRATT HA MHREAST 
UA TASTES SRAATA: | 
BAU ATaaslaaay Ay TY- 
As AAA BAT AIST J TAHAT U2 Lo'l 
Sloka 110.—Those stones that possess the colour 
or lustre of movn light, crystal gem, pearl, gold, blue 
gem, mercuric sulphide (?), collyrium, the rays of the 
rising Sun, or yellow orpiment, are auspicious; and the 
following is the authority of Saye Manu in Vritta metre 
.on the point. 


wal aazla Gen Bay waa aig aig | 
aa a ueg aalea Usd AANA WIG HAT 12 


Sloka 111 ---‘Such stones as enumerated above are 
auspicious and ought not to be broken, since they are 
always occupiel by Yakshas and Nayas. The kings in 
whose realms such rocks are found will never experience 
drought. 


4 aa A Frat aera Trae: ae RegaraTy | 


msTreasaam gaara AAAs We Vall 


Sloka 112.—When a rock cannot be broken by 
hammering, fire should be made on it with the logs of 
Palasa and Tinduka trees andit should be burnt until it 


Adh. LIV. SI}. 113-118] ag:vareitsvare: 


ee Recast mi aha eerste! eeainy mt emormerain: 


481 


assumes the colour of the fire and then it should be 
sprinkled with lime water Then it can be broken. 
wa Prd aeamaera at acaqeen: aad aq) 
BG Wargsd Asian wned seeAantarat We ati 
Sloka 113,—The ashes of Maneevaka tree and 
reeds should be boiled in water and sprinkled on the rock 
seven times after heating it. Then it will break. - — 
THAARIUE A_HaeaAT Alias Teelar | Tieaq | 
aquagIaeudag crated at was Nevill 
Sloka 114,—Butter-milk, gruel and liquor with horse 
gram and Jujube fruits must be kept for seven nights and 
then poured on the rock and heated as before. Then it 
will break. 
ara Ta ET US feat arta Regs ARE | 
TT aiaa: ae Vat TeHeasaetaal Merasear tt 
Sloka 115. ~-The leaves and bark of Neem tree, 
Sesamum stalks, Apamarga, Tinduka and Guduchi must 
be burnt to ashes. These ashes should be dissolved in 


the urine of cows and poured six times on the heated 
rock, Then it will break. 


Sloka 116.—Same as Ch. L. Sl. 25, (P. 405), supra. 
Sloka 117,—Same as Ch. L. S}- 26, (P. 405), supra. 
TS AUTATAAET Gal aA a AEM, 
RHSTATTLALA ASAT AT alam: AA: | 
at Viesala aware azqaaaTag 
araranrigiaea at aiaay got feaaia ies 2 gen, 
‘Sloka 118.—A pond extending from east to west 


retains Water for a long time, while one from nosth to 
q. &- 61 


482 teedigarary fAdh. LIV. Sl. 119-1939, 


sae ethel eee eve OE ee ee Barnet a = stone nn Hin Rn tie eter mp rim areca 


south does not, since it is spoilt invariably by the waves 
raised by the wind. One who wishes for such a pond 
or tank should cover its walls in contact with the water 
with strong timber,-or with stones and the lire, the soil 
being rendered hard by the trampling of elephants, 
horses, etc. 

RHATATT RH: : aiagqearqTarala: | 

DCCC UP eS ETE ICI AMITATAT RLS 


" Sloka 119.—-The banks of the tank must be shaded 
by Kakubha, banyan, mango, Plaksha, Kadamba, Nichula, 
Jambu, Vetasa, Neepa, Kuravaka, Tala, Asoka, Madhuka 
and Bakula trees. 


at 4 Aatataty Ha MaaGantaig | 
waiad fafat ward Heart aa: GigiaUayay ueou 
Sloka 120.—On one side let an outlet for the water 
be made with the passage being built of stones ; let a 
panel without apertures be fixed in a frame and fastened 
to the earth with dust and mud. 
AMAA AUTH MARAS HTT! | 
HARESAMTHAT: RI TATA ULV 
Sloka 121.—A mixture of antimony, Musta bulbs, 
Andropogon, powder of Rajakosataka and myrobalan 
combined with Kataka nuts should be put into a well. 
at SEP SAT (AG alas ae agQuaed wag | 
GAA MAMAS GF Galea DoT TIT ue 
““G Sloka 122,—lIf the water is muddy, pungent, salt- 
ish, of bad taste, and not of good odour, it will by this 


Mixture become clear, tasteful, good-smelling, and en- 
dowed with other good qualities. 


LIV. 123-125. LV-1] aq:varaitseara: 483 


eal aTTATagsTaig at e07: | 

AANA AEA Rat PAI AMT 12 t 

Sloka 123.—The asterisms which are propitious for 
sinking wells are Hasta, Magha, Anuradha, Pushya, 
‘Dhanishta, Uttaraphalguni, Uttarashadha, Uttarabha- 
drapada, Rohini and‘ Satabhisha. 


Beat aera als azzaaniok Areata | 
HAATAQa: aeqss Marta TAA Uw 
Sloka 124.—One should first offer oblations to 
Varuna and drive ‘a wedge of binyan or Vetasa at the 
place of the Vein, having honoured it with flowers, per- 
fumes and incenses. 


wR aAAT Aart alee 
Saga TSeTAAS EST | 
Wa amIsiae Bra Rata 
AFaATTaEtN Arawaratg UVwall 
Sloka 125.—Having viewed the opinions of Bala- 
deva and others, [ have first dealt with the subject of 
water derived from the clouds after the full Moon in the. 
month of Jyeshta (Adh. XXIII, sepra). This second 
method of exploring water from the earth has now been 
clearly treated by me, Varahamihira, by the favour of 
the sages. 


Thus ends the 54th Adhyaya on ‘“‘the exploration of Water 
Springs.’ 


TATTACTINTT: |I4ll Treatment of Trees, 
MISA A AAT AVIA | 
TRA Tomes ATI UN 


484 aeeftarna — (Adh. LV. Sl. 2-5. 


epee tien ei AEP NG Te NO NEE IE le aenay aon TIE TMN Rubio owgneenae ie ERE sit ~~ 


ampere tty 


Sloka 1.—One should have gardens laid out on the 
banks of water, inasmuch as tanks and the like are not 
lovely without shade on their margins 

wat ye aagaiat far Tat fas a9 | 
gitqaieia salar, BAATAM Wa: URI . 

Sloka 2.—A soft soil is favourable to all sorts of 
trees. One should first of all sow there sesamum, which 
must be crushed when in bloom. Thisis the first work 
to be done for the soil. 

aul WZ Sizqq: 

qalannager: ara WrArasw: | 

aa QT: Zar gar: qaieageaiaa: 

aeranagamatg: airaga: | 
ARET: TARA TINA Bey ar 131 

Sloka 3.— The tree Arishta, Punnaga and Sirisha 
alony with Priyangu creeper should first he planted in 
‘gardens as well as near houses for ensuring prosperity. 
agt 4 HIgaq: 
aMsaqarweygania Maza: 
fairer: ter wiarasia = i 
Ga Fat: Yar Har: ava ata wqaq | 
gee ara géeqaaag au 


TAA MHKTAFSFATHSAL: | 
aarsaaaa Aaquragee | Vi 
Ud FA: Boeaeat Taga asisar: | 
YSRSesyg THs Tata: ge Taz sit 
Slokas 4-5.—In respect of jack tree, Asoka, plantain, 


Jambu, lemon, pomegranate, grape vine, Palivata, Matu- 
Janga (citron) and jasmine creeper, the grafting may be 


Adh. LV. SI. 6-7.] TATA SAT: 485 


a oa 
Ne meena Re aR ie mai ee ER EE cE La iy ete nentneRU TSIEN ERS ral st A OEe TTS ey atte cee 


done by smearing a branch with cow-dung and transplant- 
ing it on the branch of another; for it may be done by 
cutting off the trunk of a tree and by transplanting it like 
a wedge on the trunk of another tree. (Here the part 
where the junction is effected must be covered with a 
coating of mud). 

MA A BIA: 

qatagent asqdingreeisar: | 

SIAACSIMS: BlVcslA aga¢4 tt 

Reashy waa a A gewar: Kisaraar | 

waaa sisare Tatar fasza 


amaaary Bae waaay Rama | 
aT TF QeHeay aH Ta Ue 


Sleka 6.—The grafting should be done in fafae 
season for those that have not yet got branches; in tara 
for those that have grown branches; in the beginning of 
mong§oon for those that have large branches. The parti- 
cular direction of the cut off tree should be maintained in 
grafting also. 

AMT W BAT: 

aware a gar: fart ata waa | 

Hanes ener vasa raraa: | 

qesrar: wiaal & ara wags g UiTaT 


gaaadiztered eta: | 
aR SAA ASrATAT ATTY 9H 


- Sloka 7.—-Trees can be taken to other countries and. 
there grafted on others, if they are smeared from root to 
the stem with ghee, Andropogon, sesamum, honey, 
Vidanga, milk and cow-dung. 


486 _-geeeiftararg, == [Adh, LV.SI.' 8-12. 


OEE TERRE SE SS “UNemaerntatigietiht i mt SAU, eeanepiman ats Slides DAES Me wn sawn 


aut a 
ga att an aigganiaeaaa: | 
favyeqa qa AEA NTT IAT i 
afayear ati: Tat Hal Alagzsra: | 
bas x AAA 
WING THAT ATT C1 
Sloka 8.—One ought to be clean and worship a tree 
with ablutions and pastes, and then eraft it. Then it wil 
thrive even with the leaves with which it is grafted. 
° Cu: A x, A ‘ 
art TIT TAA Alans Raa | 
TUS YT Me AHO Tita Za: 1 FH 
Slokas 9,—The transplanted trees should be watered 
morning and evening in summer; on alternate days in 
cold season; and whenever the soil is dry during the rains, 


TYTATTU AHP TFTTSA: | 

dinqrandstarsgara aaiiea: 12 01 

ays THAT aR TAT | 

fafatismranaty gears Tra: een 

Slokas 10-11.—Jambu, Vetasa, Vanira, Kadamba, 
fig, Arjuna, Matulunga, grape vine, lemon, pomegranate, 
Vanjula, Naktamala, Tilaka, Jack, Timira and Amrataka, 
these sixteen trees grow in a moist soil. 
° as 4 
TWA Aids Beay, geqieary | 
SAN Meaea KA Tat TT MATT UU 


Sloka 12,—-It is very good, if trees are planted 20 
cubits apart; moderate, if 16 cubits apart; and inferior, if 
12-cubits apart. 


AW FT Sgaq: | 
wear feafiden qaugad sag | 
wea Wen Raw grew aay | 


Adh. LV. SI. 13.16.]  vaqatratrseara: 48? 


® 


HEUTAT AT: ALTAeA? FIT | 
age a aed araraeaiea vifea: nea 
Slokas 18.—Trees growing contiguously and touch 
ing one another with their roots interlocked are tortured 
and do not yield fruits in sufficient quantity. 


Plaaaay Wat AI WITT | 
AasA WAUGlal AAIG Ae uel = 


Sloka 14.—Trees get discase from cold blasts and 
hot Sun: their leaves becoine pale-white, sprouts become 
scanty and sickly, their branches become dry and their 
milk oozes out. 


fataftaaqaaatt aa Aaiaay | 
SHIA TAIT Aicarear ues 
Slokas 15.—Thereupon, the trees should be treated. 
At the outset, the trees should be cleared of ulcers and 
the like with a knife. Then a paste made of Vidanga, 
ghee and silt must be applied to those parts and they 
should be sprinkled with water and milk. 
aul a Bizag: 
qta@iazaa sau Bgares a | 
asi® quaediat Sal: Vase WE 
Baa VaTalayesalatsra ate | 
miaatl g wag (eqat saaa a y 
faleraag Basar 4 a a4: gadar: | 
a AUIAR Tea: AST TTA: 
eqna sya qaitoer BIT | 
qhaiaa ae: igigs aaafaaa uy 


TIAUD FUT Adawowa: 1 
TAMAIMAR: KUTT 124 


488 geeatearar = [Adh.SI. LV. 17-18. 


c 
eminent sli SRS EEE ENA hy AE OE A ST SE EER “hee net dmb enamel aggnnnniystt SRA <n wain «hli 


Sloka 16.—When the fruits of a tree are destroyed, 
it should be watered with milk cooled after being boiled 
with horse-gram, black gram, green gram, sesamum and 
barley. Being so treated, it will have abundant flowers 
and fruits. 

MARAIS TIMSs & Aang | 

ABA ASAT Tataasat aE lil 

AAAN A ~ bat 
AAUAa a ARs BAT TCTs | 
aediyensatat A REINA Tag Rc 
~Slokas 17-18.—For increasing the yield of flowers 

and fruits of trees, creepers and shrubs, they should be 
sprinkled always with a mixture of two Adhakas (128 
palas) of the powder of the dung of goats and sheep, one 
Adhaka of sesamum, a Prastha (16 palas) of wheat parti- 
cles, a Tula (100 palas) of beef and a Drona (256 palas) 
of water kept for seven nights. 

3% a 

aq Hors emsnras: waRNs: | 

a tygigan weedy qanay diss y 

qauaam aeq qaviface staat 

ATUSISY Pea: RY. WiagqwayA vn 

MTSET AUNT ZIOY BTUTs: | 

mits | Aqgin ald Qrawqeay i 

qa Vaud F4 aE wigalaeqar: | 

sersay aeaq azy faq wag 

aut @ SAT: 

uataerat gt cet ages a sag | 

fosraaise AMA att eae a | 

iatawads wez a aiwew =| 

AMEAGte: Ss sergaeaa: 

@ atenageda GRargftaga: | 


Adh. LV. SI. 19.26.] veavtareiysvara: 489 


arama aa wanted damsagaearan(say | 
ron e a) 

Tara aga Read mteatAtias qray 11S 

niagataataarad aad a aaa | 

AaATAIsIAa ad AAI FAIATHAT AZ IIRoll 

Slokas 19-20.—Any seed should be soaked in milk 

for ten days, taking it out daily with the hand smeared 
with ghee. Then it must be rolled miny a time in coW 
dung, fumigated with the flesh of deerand hog; thereupon 
with flesh and hog’s marrow, it should be planted in a 


prepared soil (by sowing sesamum). Being sprinkled with 
milk and water, it will grow and bloom. 


farasialt aif agi aitaafieqaastt | 
qfantaateaa ataar afiar a aad aftzar ue2u 


Stoka 21.—Even a tamarind seed produces a sprout 
when sprinkled witha compound of the flour of rice, black 
gram and sesamum and particles of wheat and stale 
meat and repeatedly fumigated with turmeric powder. 


alteqagiawna qaraenaanasaaearay | 

qalyal Taaatael sarasge: aRareqet URN 
fit Ta Waa gale Tsad Ura Kiaeatay | 
fay Ra altaracdald As aaisaeaq 1230 
amlag aaeger walt area sas | 
Th card agalas aq savtRMaaieada Ren 
quigamnasaad AWAAMA RAL Aa: | 
Raa FT eIAATIaed TATA aq UU 
sd a dit sarqerd) aeeneaar stages fray | 


ag Hang Tara Reuse weeemTTy neg 


‘ 


q. a 62 


490 gerdigarargy (Adh. SI. LV. 27-28, 

Slokas 22-26.—For making the wood-apple seeds 
sprout, take the roots of Sarasaparilla, Amalaka, Dhava, 
Vasika, the branch with leaves of Vetasa, of Suryavalli, 
of Syama creeper, arid of Atimukta (in all eight), boil 
them in milk, cool it, and then soak the seeds in this 
liquid for a period of time required for 100 beats. Then 
after removing and drying them in the Sun daily for 30 
da-ys, sowthem. Thisis the method prescribed for it. 
Make a pit one cubit in diameter and twice as deep, fill 
it with milk and water; let the pit dry, burn it, and then 
smear it witha compound of honey, ghee andashes, First 
fill it with mud to a height of four digits, then fill it with 
the powder of black gram, sesamum and barley; over this 
put mud to the same height again, and then once again 
fill it with the powder of black gram, etc; add to it an 
infusion of fish and water and then pound all this until it 
becomes a thick mass. Sow the seed at a depth of four 
digits and sprinkle it with fish-water and fleshwater. Soon 
will a tendril with nice sprouts cover the pandal in an 
astonishing manner. 


TAMSFBArYIRSReA AAAI | 
CaIsA TW Ast MHMATRASA AT lll 
Titd Reaieqaas aaTAeARy | 
BOMUFa Ral vada Hagay Ril 


Slokas 27-28.—Any seed being steeped a hundred 
times in a paste of Ankola frui: or 1a its oil, or in a paste 
or oil of Slesimataka fruit, wil, when planted in the 
earth, sprinkled with hail water sprout instantaneously, 
and what wonder that the branches should be loaded with 
fruits | "% 


LV. 29.31. LVI.. 1-2] aaqaarsitseara: 491 
~ A A a : 
weqHa diss fegeiga aaaq wy | 
agiotiaagssarat aqpeaaq zit 


asa BUT aT aia Pataca | 
PUBIASAAT SYRIA HHBUTT 113 011 
Slokas 29-80.—A wise man ought to remove the shell 

of the Sleshmataka seeds, steep them, in shade, seven 
times in water mixed with a paste of Ankola fruits; awa 
then rub them with buffalos’ dung, and lay them in 
manure. Being planted thereafter in mud soaked with 
hail-water, they will produce fruit in a day. 


TAAZGASAT Al Yor AaTAAIal TA | 
Sealiy Rereiia: qaqa ary ze 
Sloka 31.—The asterisms prescribed by the Seers of 
transcendental wisdom for the planting of trees are the 
three Uttaras, Rohini, Anuradha, Chittra, Mrigasiras, 


Revati, Mula, Visakha, Pushya, Sravana, Aswini and 
Hasta. 


Thus ends the 55th Adhyaya on “The Treatment of Trees”, 


oe. 


MATTAMSITT Ill Description of Temples. 


ON N 


He WA erfeseoarer ara faizasa 7 | 
CCID CCE CICOIC RR ERUMIRGT 


Sloka 1.—Having made big water tanks and laid out 
gardens, one should build a temple in order to enhance 
one’s reputation aud religious merit. 


cede VIIA J BRAT TNT | 
Sarasa: Ba AMCIg THAT URI 


492 . geeateatara, = [Adh. LVI. Sl. 3-5. 
Sloka 2,—One wishing to enter the worlds attained 
by performing sacrifices and sinking wells and the like, 
should build a temple, whereby one would get the fruits 
of both. 
ge aanes Gd ardinrasimizay 
aut Srny 
Ze UNG Ala adisracqaiasaa | 
Eeiu: qgqaeda aquwaacys: 
uiuetaixiiaaal ada a gears | 
aqipqagiatg Zraaaara FW 
MaATTlaAg aa: Ta sahara t 
aq | BAT: 
*VUqTafahwdaataHara waar: 
AAG AIHA aA THAAA 
adreqasiniezaaaaana 7 | 
eaifeqi® aar gataga qaalsaq ui 
VASA: Sal TAATA Brag | 
ASsMATHY SIIHTRY @ | 
wmMAaay alyagqaesied Saat 1131 
Sloka 3,—Deities take a pleasure in residing in places 
which are furnished with plenty of water and gardens 
naturally or otherwise. 
aug atsadtsareaausag | 
satataaastaigitaeartg veil 
e x oe 
BARCST HMA ABMB AMAT | 
qyeaMaSeVAN NATTA NYU 
Slokas 4-5.—Gods dwell with pleasure in (near) the 


lakes where the rays of the Sun are warded off by the 
parasol of lotus, which have clear water containing ave- 


nues of white lotuses tossed by the shoulders of swans, 


Adh. LVI. SI. 6-9.]  seqrmaraitseara: 493 


which resound with the notes of swans, flamingoes, 
Kraunchas and ruddy geese, and which have the aquatic 
animals resting in the shade of the Niehula trees on their 
bank. 


MARA RITHSAT! | 
AMMATH TT TRG Gl 
HSIN Aan APATITE. | 


gisargaaicar gagiara Prera: ton 
Slokas 6-7.—Likewise do they dwell in places where 
the rivers have large girdles of Krauncha birds, sweet 
voice in the form of the melodious notes of the royal 
swans, silken saree of the water, belts made of fishes, the 
floral ear-decorations in the form of the trees in bloom on 
the banks, round buttocks of confluences, lofty bosoms of 
sand-dunes; and merry laughter of the swans. 
TAAAAISMATTETTA | 
"wed saat fra GeyaTAA F ile 
Sloka 8.—They sport always in the vicinity of 
forests, rivers, mountains and cataracts; and in towns 
with pleasure-gardens 
aM FT BIT: 
Ealssawaraqraea aeq: giarausar: | 
anTatanseat Mageigagar: 
CASUWVTAAIN: sissrsrqaisar: | 
| seqgrfaaga garg: Rn@agat: u 
., aa taro anita aifercariteqaieaar: | 
AAA Arata ATs MAT ATTRA | 
a aq oat Teed Tzaraacaly 11811 
Sloka 9.—The several sorts of soil recommended for 
the construction of houses for the several castes* are like. 


494 , geeditarary = [Adh. LVI. SI. 10-16. 


wise recommended to persons of the different classes when 
they wish to build temples. 


See Adhyaya LIIT-Slokas 96-97, supra. 
qaqnes HI SAT TAT az | 
Sit aT qNay aay asta WAT Moll 
Sloka 10.—The temple site should always be divided 
into 64 squares. «Its middl> door being situate in one of 
the four cardinal quarters is highly auspicious. 
at Peart waa fey aagara: | 
SHAMAN TAA Gea HS TAT 12 Lu 
Awad waza Masses: aaa | 
wate Fait at Bangesaq 122i 
Sewn Vehediot avar axgeraes | 
eaeqaaad We Waa way Zl 
Raaaaaa: Wea | 
HURIATaA Tala Aagaq evi 
4 ageataen: daa: aang: | 
faye: WaMiia: saaaeTag | 24 
SAAT ATTA AfAaT Arq alaitear 
at watt waa aa gatatay faites veal 


Slokas 11-16.—The height of a temple should be 
double its width and the flight of steps (over which the 
edifice is built) equal to a third of this height. The 
Sanctum sanctorum should be half the above width, 
All rund this there are walls. Its door is one fourth of the’ 
sanctum sanctorum in width and twice as high, The 
side-frame of the door has a breadth of a quarter of its 
height ; similarly the threshold and the upper block. The 


Adh. LVI. Sl. 11-16.)  saqaraitssara: | 495 
thickness of the frames is equal to a fourth of their 
breadth. A door consisting of three, five, seven or nine 
frames is highly commended. Lower down, upto a height 
of ¢th of the doorpost, two images of door-keepers 
must be kept; the remaining space being ornamented 
with the carvings of auspicious birds, Bilwa trees, 
Swasthika figures, pitehers, couples, foliage, creepers and 
Siva’s hosts. The idol with its pedestal ought to be ar- 
high as the door diminished by an eighth, of these, the 
idol being of two parts and the pedestal one. 

There are many varieties of temples, of which Meru is one, 
whose dimensions are: Mreadth = 32 cubits, height = 64 cubits: 
the height of the flight of steps ~ ‘°° cubits; the Sanctum sanot- 
orum = 16 cubits; all round there are walls of 3 cubits’ thickness. 
The door is 4 cubits in breadth; it- height is cubits; the width 
of the frame and threshold = 2 cubits ; its thickness = 19 digits: 
the height of the idol = 4 cubits and 16 digits ; the height of the 
pedestal = 2 cubits and 8 digits. 

fal A BiIAq: 

GUS: BAST: BASAA: | 

aga wats qwaagqagraar i 

Agus sivetat na a aa eqaa | 

Ee a aan ay qaleeed saa 

MUTI: BI Talus | 

austa agal Araarseaase aye y 

Aaa a gr agigqonissay | 

graagaagqain eae: wea: Ba: i 

sqradaie: arararaa Fea: | 

Taq Wizalaa aria watiraaz u 

THU CAMA Al GI GH TAN ae | 

giftaraa aud gritival axitzer: || 

SUS BBAATISA Wise g SAT) 

aauteiina ofa rrr’: 4 


i 


456 teedtfearcira, [Adh. LVI. SI. 17-20, 


sftquaiad: Wagdaa aaa: | 
QUAL BayVrigaaasnsia: 

4a alates euregq gree sifia gaa | 
Si unit waar sat gdiada iter n 
manga aa qt ara | 
fanied @ faae a aleqarqaraag i 


Yenrqhoraaasseaaezal: | 
AYRITATT A AAIAT AU: 112\9I 


TEU TH Cas TIAA Fes | 

fae TARAHT: Megs yaar | cl 
seta fafa: aim: Wate: asea aaT | 
ANGARATT SAN ATTA! NPA! 

Slokas 17-19,—There are twenty types of temples 
enumerated here by me: viz: (1) Meru (2) Mandara 
(3) Kailasa (4) Vimana chchanda (5) Nandana (6) Sarmu- 
dga (7) Padma (8) Garuda (9) Nandivardhana (10) 
Kunjara (11) Guharaja (12)Vrisha (13) Hamsa (14) 
Sarvatobhadraka (15) Ghata (16) Simha (17) Vritta (18) 
Chatushkona (19) Shodasasri and (20) Ashtasri. I shall 
now begin to define them in regular order. 

qT WivasleTAa APIA | 
a, Lee ~ 
Tiqaqaaaiaagalaaieys li oll 

Sloka 20.—Among these, the. temple known as 
Meru is hexangular, has twelve storeys and internal win- 
dows of various types. It has four doorsin the quarters 
and is 32 cubits in width. | 

BUl YG BRA: 

afreaafveict aqgtt wise | 

aac edsar fafangeritaar: a 


Adh. LVI. SI. 21-23.] szagqrattsearz: 497 


greategaia ates: aaa: | 
start aAeae: wiraser faa i 


Ragararal crag wea: rarga: | 
SAH Aaa A STATA MV | 
Sloka 21,—The Mandara temple is hexangular, 30 
cubits in width and has ten storeys and domes. Kailasa 
is similar to this, but has eight floors and is 28 cubits in. 
width. 
AAT’ A BIA: 
fAM_AYy fata: Wrarzist ata: | 
Aula Cwrar seaerasa: Tra: | 
quia: Raga: sare gqitae: u 


Wana Waraasasayaraa: | 
waa ata Fam TAM NeMwsya: 122W 
Sloha 22.—The Vimana Cchanda temple is 21 cubits 
in breadth and has latticed windows. The Nandana too 
has six storeys and 16 cupolas and measures 32 cubits. 
aat A BZA: 
Talsagel faaraseraata: 
SSCA aa Walt: SAW: 0 
APTA TM: TUTHNAATEAMAT a: I 
QeUulas WSMIseG Wale: WAAt Aa: 


Ja: AURAL VA TAHA: TAT AST | 
THA MALT FT YVR TA UR 


Sloka 23.—The Samudga is circular in shape, and 
Padma is like a lotus in appearance ; both these measure 
8 cubits, have only one storey and one dome: [ The 
round one is shaped like a green gram .and the other has 
eight petals]. 

x. a. 63 


498 ageaigarara (Adh. LVI. Adh. 24-26. 


aUl GQ BIZAT: | 


SUSE GYR: ALT: GFA T 
EMes g aio wiser sR ylaar u 
NSEHIA USS aealia aT wEsTAsHaARiet: | 
BAY BAMA Mapadisvetg Figen uli 
Sloka 24.—The Garuda is shaped like an eagle with 
wings and tail. The Nandin is like the former but with- © 


out the wings and tail. Both these are 24 cubits in 


width. They have seven stéreys and are adorned with 
20 cupolas. 


aut A SIFT: | 

NSS NVVP'E TATesayiaa: | 
arel aurBiata: Qeatewga: Tau 
sunt wagqeang aearal aqafaaer | 
qaaig Tae syar Aaa atu 


GAL TA WAGs Wisases TAeaatl Faq | 
TEU? WETHAIeCM Sl AIT at U/l 
Sloka 25.—The Kunyara is shaped like the back of an 
elephant (like a standing etc.) and measures 16 cubits all 
round from the bottom. It has only one storey. The 
Guharaja measures 16 cubits and is  single-storeyed. 
Both have a roof with three dormer- windows. 
HUT A SISA: | 
SAU TWAT ee: siea faeqa: 
TRU Tels faswswray Wea waza: i 
fsaeqarat awit aan: Brat Zea | 
Maislsasa WANA FT ABieaar i 


qi GRY BIE AHeqa TA! | 
ZA LAWHITT TASES BHAT: 1/2 


Adh. LVI.SI. 47-28.) sz tatatissvata: 499 

Sloka 26.— The Vrisha has only one storey and 
dome, measures 12 cubits and is circular all round. The 
Hamsa 1s shaped like a swan (with beak, wings and tail) 
and measures 12 cubits. The Ghata is shaped like a 
pot and measures 8 cubits. 


Te ealeamiaentintta etme enn ae eaten adel 


sie eete te rtone ae 


dil enemcieenenneentiadte lol comment alae nameee lh aaaasneied 


Ul A GB IAG | 

TD TAUTAY AHTARYS: | 
IHN. A AA: HTT: Tessa: w 
eat garglayat gear HaUaeqa: | 
CENASUZB: TATSTSLA: I 
Gz: ewUNS INT faeaieliseat: wa: | 


gngqaaaaeiarad ANa ATA: | 
ATVATTTUIS: TET: Tatiay loll 


Sloka 27.--The Sarvtobhadra has four doors, many 
domes, many beautiful dormer-windows and five storeys, 
its breadth being 26 cubits. 


at BW BRisaAg: | 


Rag ymarge tae: | 
waar aga: Tata: o 
— quuta: agua TARA: | 
AagMVA ZAG: Aaa TAA: 
rs ~ ~ i ts, Ta ~ ¢ 
fae: fagHleal AITARITISETAT AAT: | 
ATUASAASU TAMSZACT BATA? Re Ii 
Sloka 28.—The Simha has 12 angles, is adorned 
with images of lions. Its width is 8 cubits. The re- 
maining four, viz., Vritta-round, Chatushkona-quadrangu- 
lar, Shodasasri-one with 16 angles, and Ashtasri-with 8 
angles have significant namesand are dark inside. All 
these have only one storey and one cupola, except the 
Chaturasra which has five domes. 


500 geediearara [ Adh. LVI. SI. 29-30. 


ae Reinier eC eE Rand Eee i omen TIES aman tee eee ee ee ~ ee ew Seen ee eee — NRO Reet iP 


These dark ones do not have external light entering the in- 
terior. There should bs walls close by all t:ound the temple and 
the entrance 1s to be on the western side. The walls are 80 con- 
structed that they look part and parcel of the temple structure 
and not apart from it. The outer gate being on the north, the 
door of the temple should be made in the east (front) The idol in 
the temple should |e made of gems, by whose lustre, there will be 
ample light inside. 


aU WBA: 
fag Mazaamra: airgrearaga: | 
facesvraeeea: MS! GA A Waser a 
Za ZUG a: erat: esaaqsaeaarag? | 
ReGHUE BA F WHEE! AUT: | 
THISSlgal: AT IMMUNATas: | 
nm \ \ 
WABFIAAT WAAiIAT TWAy | 
bi  ] 
g 3 ey OS ¢c 
Ag SAAT FIT Ba FARA RSI 
Sloka 29,— According tu Maya, the height of a storey 
should be 108 digits, while according to Viswakarman it 
is 3§ cubits or 84 digits. 
aa a Aa: 
¢ 
MA QAR OA WHAT BAA | 
aur a faaayl | 
UA AUTEN A ESAT F YAS | 
Neon 
HE: MITA AAAS (TNAAs | 
ii Ts 23 “~ ii a 
RYUAGUSCADHK FA WeSle_ CeFaly HR ofl 
Sloka 30.— Learned sculptors (carpenters) reconcile 
the above two opinions on the subject. If you add the 


height of the crown-work (dove ridge or cornice), the 
smaller number will equal the greater. 


By Kapotapali is meant lion-faces made of wood jutting out. 


eas wee | lermeie el 


LVI. 31, LVIL. 1-3.) aqamretisesta: 501 
a UTSTwHY | 
BUA Tad faze | agwar: | 
AY BW Aeawad Asad | 
Sqaqiwiga ara aqzaiiaed | 
Wasa ag aa aaAviat waz tI 
wRolaaa aed zag satay! 


mMagsaniae Ky Atal: 
Rig wea aeaita arg | 
yeatararaaana wylr ala 
ATI TA VAT BarshaHe 3 il 
Sluka 31,—Thus have [| succinctly treated of the 
characteristics of temples. All that has been expounded 
by sase Garea is found in this Chapter. I have derived 
authority for my statements by ‘following. closely the 
texts of vreat leneth composed:by Sages Manu and others. 


Thus tuds the 26th Adhyaya on the ~ Lescription of Temples ”’. 


THSITANEITS 1/491] On the Adamantine Glue. 


A AESHATA BTR FIAT | DAI STM | 

Hala agnat aarTaIeR TAT Ag LA 

wes alsaTims Blaswastise yayqy | 

AAASA TBR TAA? AATAST RI 

ATA APISABARH FORARTAL | 

HAVUAAA FAL BVBIST FHSUNSA 1:34) 

Slokas 1-3—Take unripe 'Tinduka fruits, unnpe 

wood-apples, flowers of silk cotton, seeds of Sallaki, 


502 geeafgarmia = [Adh. LVII. Sl. 4.7. 


Mihreninn at AeamE il ARR ET nt Se mel ree Ate Ln re in a pepe retail EERE 


the bark of Dhanvana and Vacha; boil them all in a 
Drona of water and reduce it to an eighth of its original 
volume. Combine the sediments with the following 
substances, v2z., Srivasaka (a secretion of a tree used as 
incense), Raktabola, Guggulu, Bhallataka, Kunduruka 
(the exudation of Deodar), the exudation of Sarjarasa 
tree, Atasi and Bilwa fruit. This paste is termed Ada- 
mantine vlue. 


¢ ~ “~ 4 
WAEGISANST NAT FAH | 
AAA TAS WAAAY VN 
Sloka 4.—When this glue, being heated, is applied 
to temples, mansions, windows, Siva’s emblems, idols, 
walls and wells, it will last for a crore of years. 
BAM HSMP ISTE TAR ey eT ET ig | 
AMAA A TRAITARSAYRAUAT UA 
aaaaMaaana Ve sea: Har Balatsay | 
TMA TAATTTTAY TIARA 1G 
Slokas 5-6.—There is a second glue of excellent 
qualities made of the sediments, as explaincd before, of 
lac, Kunduru, Guyguiu, house smoke, wood-apple, Bilwa 
kernel, fruits of ,Naga, Neem, Tinduka and Madana, 


madder, Sarjarasa, Raktabola and Amalaka. This too 
is made use of for the purposes mentioned above. 


STEICURICIURECKULUEC IESE COE 
farrqeaeata: ae AWA! ALA BRISA [911 
Sloka 7.—There is a third glue known as Vajra- 
tala which is composed of the horns of cows, buffaloes 


and goats, hair of donkeys, buffalo-hide, cow-hide, Neem 
fruits, wood apples and Raktabola. 


LVII. 8, LVII[. 1-3.] agaanerseara: 503 


Cee nn ee eeprmeentian iter enn te et 


wel diana wae aq Afraraa: | 


aaaHiyay asad faxat WAT lll 


Sloka 8.—A mixture consisting of eight parts of 
Jead, two of | bell-metal, and one of iron rust, has been 
mentioned by Mayaand isto be known as Vajra san- 
yhata (Diamond compound). 


aul WA. | 


ayer aiqurary Brag ar autaay | 


OO nee 


WiWasareg Ae.Al aBea: Gata: 


Thus ends the 57th Adhyaya on “the Adamantine glue.”’ 


oe EE gE 


WAAISAMIEANT 4 Description of Idols. 


MHA Wal Yat Tala TAT ANA | 
+ ASFA WAY aya alg TATA Ne 
Sloka 1.—The smallest particle of dust that comes 
to sight, when the Sun passes through the ‘interstice of a 
window, is to be known as .an Atom; and this is the 
smallest unit’of all measures, 
WAG TewisIaqE wiRs Be | 
ACM WAMFSIR Bala ASA Nl 
.~) 
Sloka 2.—An atom, a dust-particle, hair’s tip, a nit, 
a louse,a barley-corn and a digit are in order eight times 
bigger than the preceding measure. One digit becomes 
an integer. 
.  ANTATAMAMAA aegataisa: | 
aeatenaal ara caesar 3H 3 


504 ‘es geaftaraa (Adh. LVIII, Sh 4-7. 


RCRA OE eee OEE TAIN NO et LURE ERR a/eR ope Ane: Leelee RAE RR on EET Eee an meee Be melt meeee eeslane re 


Sloka 8.—The height of the pedestal (of an idol) is 
a third of the height of the door of a temple diminished 
by an eighth part. . The idol is twice as high as the 
pedestal. 


Swartigey Aaitasad 4 gay | 
AAA F AGT eae gas BAT vit 


Sloka 4.—The face of an idol is 12 of its own digits 
“long and broad. Nagnajit, however, states that its length 
must be 14 digits which isa measure prevalent in the 
Dravida country. 


Here a digit means 13,0f the height of the idol. 
qa 4 ANA | 
MET ZIT AS But a agqee | 
AFSNA TU gla sara AWas wag 
AUSSI TEA TAT UFT AT RTT | 
& age 4 cat Fae a aes faaag thn | 


Sloka 5.—The nose, forehead, chin and neck are 
four digits long ; so too are the ears; the jaws and the 
chin are two digits broad. 


AAS Bare MEARS Te Tet | 
AHRFA T Tal BA | HARA Tat ue 
Sl. ka 6.—The forehead is 8 digits in, breadth. Twe 


digits further off are the temples, being of four digits. 
The ears are two digits in extent. 


BOT Mss gaya qo Yt 
RAGA BFW & Aera-qaAT |i 


Adh. LVIII. Sl. 8-11.] aecansitscara: 505 


Seri tints Ee ret ree te emer 


a mnatensiahsamnammmenadaa.sedeeneaaatamiareatencineahanatevethteediacertnmen tage aaiaeamenl ym cornet 


Sloka 7.—The tip of the ear is 4u digits off the 
corner of the eye ona level with the brows, The ear- 
hole and the raised margin near it lie at the same level 
as the centre of the eye and measure one digit. 


TAS aftg: seals vaeaRTAN say 
AACSHS AAT AAAa AEA UC 


~~) 
Sloka 8.—Sage Vasishta observes that the distaeca 
between the eye-corner and the ear is four digits. The 


lower and the upper lip measure respectively one digit 
and half a digit in breadth. 


AUF T UTS TIA TAFSUAG 7G | 
fags @ araageReard says Sara M8 


Sloka 9.—The dimple above the lip is half a 
digit. The mouth must be made four digits in length 
and 14 digits in thickness. An opened mouth is of three 
digits in the middle. 

a x 
ARSIEA AAG A AMA Gera Fa | 


MTAAOT PIAA A TWA Noll 
Sloka 10.~—~The sides of the nose measure two digits; 


the tip of the nose is two digits in height and breadth, 
The space between the eyes is four digits. 


agethals tera a a ae aSraa a | 
CHU THA AMAHIAISES wala 12 21 


Sloka 11.—The socket of the eye and the eye itself 
measure two digits. The pupil measures one-third of 
the above, 7. ¢. § digit; and the innermost circle of the 
pupil is $ digit. The width of the eye is one digit. 

ga 64 


506 , geeafeatary [Adh. LVIII. Sl. 12-16. 


cap teren eee eee 
C. Me 8 ' ‘ AC Tie thes 
Tard Tra GU AAS_iIAe Barwel | 
“So 
‘ _¢ hg es ot 
AALy TEVh ACPA Fa ad hy ea 
~~ LN ~~) 
Sloka 12,—-The brows measure ten digits from end 
toend; the line of the brows is ! digit in width; the 
interval between the brows is 4 digits and the length of 


each brow is 4 digits. 


Cr at 


BAN I RAL Waeatai saa 
ward HARRI T HOM AAW 23s 


Sloka 18 —The line of hair should be made = cqual 
(ten digits) to the brows conjuined. and half a digit 
thick. At the end of the eyes must be made the inner 
corner, one digit in extent. 


siaeatneaaaaraaasgeita Pat | 
aa ¢ Prana cwaeg afaresan eel 
Sloka 14.—-The head is 32 dizits in circumference, 


and 14 digits in width. But in a picture, only 12 digits 
are visible and the remaining 20 are not visible. 


He WHIAad Tiga cei aaa | 

MAT TT ART Vas aa: RT 4 
Sloka 15.—The face and the hair put together, are 
16 digits in length according to Nagnalit (% e the face 
14 digits and hair-line, 2 divits)) The neck has a width 

of 10 digits and its circumference is 21 digits. 
PST TT ETAUAAl FT aenaola | 
~“ ‘ % 

aalaeaeagiedt a aeeaTaa HA 12H 
Slokas 16.—The jdistance “between the lower part 
uf the neck and the heart is 14 digits; so also is that 


pat 


Adh, LVIIT. SI. 17-21 J HOTA ALS EAT: 507 


ee te 


e 
between the heart and the nivel. The distance between 
the centre of the nivel iad the penis is the same as 
above. 
Ae Wa GEE {7 {TEMA TS az | 
MARAT AV TS WEL A ATA UV 
Sloka 17, ~The thighs inzasure 7 digits :in length ; 


; a @ 
so do the shanks, The knec cips are 4 digits and the 
feet are also 4 civits in height. 


sreadeat 92 ayaa a war Barrage | 

qalgeditoa: wairat seam stat nec 

Sloka 18.—The feet are 12 divits lone and 6 broad; 
the great toes are 3 disits in lenvth, and 5 digits in: 
circumference ; the secon] toe is 3 digits long. 

aetmret aa: args: wT TET: | 

TATA UTA Y A TISEE RATT: Heati 


Sloka 19, --The remaining toes should be less by an 
eighth than the preceding one in order. The ele- 
vation of the big toe is .} civits; and that of the others 
less by an eighth than the preceding one in succession, 


HEA: KYA aMAaTEs ASH: | 
Teas Hara HRI aT Roll 


Sloka 20.—The experts have laid down that the 
nail of the big toe should be ? digit; that of the other 
toes at 3 digit or a little lessened for ons succeeding toe. 

AFT qRoneaaca Hey AMT a | 
wey g aa get aioe Galta': ag uae 


508 geedtgatarg, [Adh. LVIII. Sl. 22-26 ~ 


meet tA RNR E rH SEED a er 


Sloka 21.—The circumference of the end of shank 
is 14 divitsand its breadth 5 digits; but in the middle it 
is 7 digits in width and 21 in circumference. 


4A A WAZA aged saws q aioe: | 
fagat aacae ae fey acafirs: ueeai 
Sloka 22.—The width of the knee in the middle is 
8 digits ; its circumference, 24 digits. The thighs are 14 
digits broad in the middle and its circumference is 28 
digits. 


i 


aweiea ger seantaaagat Gay 
HESAH A TIA TAT WATT WRI 
Sloka 28.-- The loins are 18 digits in breadth, and 


44 digits in circumference. The navel is one digit deep 


and broad. 


aeataasaa: adiasaa asaaftore: | 
MAM: VEY WeaTyEA BEY GERSH URvii 
Sloka 24,—The circumference of the waist at the 
centre of the navel is 42 digits. The interval between 
the two paps is 16 digits. The armpits are at a height 
of 6 digits (in an oblique direction) from the paps. 
AMAA SITT TE BAT TI ATE | 
aE Tee TAA ESAT HT U4 
Sloka 25.—The extent of the shoulders is 8 digits, 
The arms as well as the forearms measure 12 digits in 
length, the arms being 6 digits broad and the fore-arms, 
4 digits. | 
TET TE Fo wWionagacawsea J | 
PANT HAS TEs Tq eae 114 


Adh. LVIII. Sl. 27-29,] weqaratsvara: 509 


Sloka 26. —The circuinference of the arms at the 
arm-pit is 16 digits and at the wrist, 12 digits. The 
palm should measure 6 and 7 digits in breadth and length 
respectively. 


TAlESIA ALA TATA TeTTATweElal | 
ATU TAT Balhae BAB F Tatar Voll 
Sloka 27.—The middle finger is 5 digits ; the fore-. 
finger is half a joint smaller ; the-ring-finger is equal to 
the fore-finger, and the little finger less by one joint. 


GagaaeE: Buea: Bra: | 
AMITABH Baiat TMSsA NACI 
Sloka 28.—The thumb should have two joints, while 


the remaining fingers must have three each. The nail 
of each finger should measure a half of its joint. 


~ w~,, ¢ 
TAASRPTTAUSE TTP Ba | 
gaat sang alata ager wala Nee 
Sloka. 29.—An image should be made in sucha 
way that its ornamerits, dress, decorations and form 
conform to the practices prevailing in the country. If it 
is possessed of the required good features, it will bestow 
prosperity by its presence. 
Saga Kasyapa is quoted here, but the idea is the saine, 
aut GA BRAT: | 
CIAUESH TIA SHE AIFSA | 
arat ofat @ Basar qeafaaearta: ti 
MEAT SHS PAHSIFS Ty ! 
equ g fagedgeeas way | 
RAUMEAT Vi Palaa aur ew | 


510 | Zara aang [Adh, LVITI. Si. 29. 


Na ey eee Gi emrR she sola | 


D inaiiaeaminanemianbematnaietiaiiiiedatioa eae 


BEST gue «a0 Bob usaf 
BUAAEAT — Cr ee 
TIUSHAM CBI os Yt 
AGIFVB AFT PANG EY EAT | 

aa BE Aa Bre ste ANT tha Mt 
2 wearerta ciara TBIF IT OT 
RS AA TS se ry 31 FSi 

adhdtdisrati FH oa ae 

MTST mIgieuT bits) GAT GATRAET 4 
URS q ears BRIA Al Ge}: Haus 
BIGU FS: Wal Kray anes i 
CHAM VLA Aa TTA PEAR 
BS MSW Bral ez Te TTA ’ 
HS AF APIA alg Gary | 
mIqM RES: ° TT TEAR EE 
TRA ATT Bs gas 

FS SARs GIT Vays Towzag: 
STI: i Sal a Qe hy aay BY 
magia atraeta aRes sate 

HS ATR sy 3 ae aT Eda | 
ags d waar Fama aes fT a 
aidiasa qaione ata. Th; ae 
Gen Waatary ve Gis Wass y 
MABFS VPAr Hear WE Paaagit 
TE; AS Ved MAA T2a cal: tt 
‘ASFS AMAT Ay BENT A Ta 
THFSM WaeHeT qaea sq gwraar 
aatet sages Faye aR aAaL | 
Geqaa BAST fg dalHig ETAT 
Faqaigea: WU AGI: Gagqargar: | 
qakeqary Ga Geis wae ti 
SSW Baga aaiar giger vag | 


Adh. LVIIL. Sl. 30-35.) esawrairseara: $i 


A OE NS RE et RE Ra aeiS Mine oe Mer am eS 


a’ ~ = ~ @ oo 
eataaTaay wat ale sea: aT Faq | 
SISMRTEA AWS WAT ETATTAMTL Zoli 
Sloka 80.—Sri Rama, son of Dasaratha, and Bali, 
son of Virochana should be mi 129 divits in height. 
The heights of the other invwre -ap. rior, moderate and 
inferior are less by 12 digits, 2. ¢., 18, 45, and 84 digits. 
The measures given So far vefer to timages whose height is 
108 digits. So, they have to be pro; ortionately reduced or in. 
creased for the other varictics 
Braiseys amataragy fey Ta ay asus | 
Cy ~ oo - Ai ae 
MAASAI: HiTG Ay OWS TH! 1324 
AAMGAAIAIT: Gata: FAA: | 
HSBHUSA UAC VAaigeysy: 1:32 
en ee Bane 
ASTI: ANA? We ATTRE | 
UAT FT RIRASHAAIT Yo '33 | 
Ly ee os Sa, SOO aE ome aa 
ce mS Sagaltvets Wie TE CH WALALTEAs | 
qa I TA Waa aH FT 18 
yaa J qd Mesa alearnes SHURA aT | 
RCM CKUHE CIBC COLE’ (atc eeea ED 
Slokas 31-85.—Those whoo wish for prosperity 
should have the image of Lori Vishnu made in the 
following manner. The Lord should have either four or 
only two arms; his breast should bear the Srivatsa 
mark ; it should be adorned witn the Kaustubha gem; 
He should be made as dark as the Atasi flower; 
He is clothed in yellow garment, shows a serene 
face, wears a diadem and ear rings, has plnmp neck, 
breast, shoulders and arms. UO; the eight arms, the 
right four have a sword, mace, arrow and emblem of 


512 | geeaftarary [Adh, LVIII. Sl. 36-39. 


ome nat Sent ts SAAR RA tenets eo Sh cheAECANLD TE ANE le SARe Er, 


peace (the fringes raised upward) ; the left ones, a bow, 
a buckler, a discus, and a couch. If only four arms are 
desired, one is the giver of peace or blessings, and the 
other wears the mice on the nght and couch and discus 
on the left. If He is made with only two hands, then 
the right hand bestows peace and the other wears the 
conch. 
THEA TSUMACAATS Ag Basa | 
AaeHVsors TATA ITaT: 1:24 
Sloka 86—Baladeva should be made having a 
plough in his hand, with eyes rolling owing to intoxica- 
tion, and wearing an ear-ring and having his complexion 
as white as conch, the Moon and the lotus-stalk. 
THAI BA eat AVTTH MAAS | 
wicdferaarrat aaa Aaeal Roll 
BA APRA A TARA ageTs BAGT 
gisat afar avaisaqad a 12cit 
TASMEYANI BVSGAITAFTT AAT | 
AAINTH! AVAYS: ATTA (128 
Slokas 87-89.—Goddess Ekanamsa should be situ- 
ated between Baladeva and Sri Krishna, with her left 
hand placedon the hip and the other hand holding a 
lotus. If she is to be four-armed, in the left hands she 
has a book and a lotus, and in the right ones, boon to the 
suppliants and a rosary. If sheis to be eight-armed, in 
the left hands, she has a water-pot, a bow, a lotus anda 
book, and in the right ones, boon, an arrow, a mirror, 
and a rosary. 


Boon-giving hand is one with ve open palm, fingers pointing 
downwards. 


Adh. LVIII. S), 40-44.] seqanaitssara: $13 


Vrqy IAM AAAI Fer | 
aaa: faa a a azafaiaaaioar vol 
Sloka 40.—Samba should be made witha mace in 
his hand ; Pradyumna, endowed with a charming body, 
with a bow in his hand. Their wives also should be 
made holding swords and shields in their hands. . 
AA RVSSHUA ITS? TEAMAACT | 
WHT PATST AMI Tenay vei 
Sloka 41.—Brahman should have four faces, a 
water-pot in his hand and is seated on a lotus. Subrah- 


manya should be a boy in appearance, hold a javelin in 
his hand and have a peacock for his ensign. 


Away feat Teer asariheaq | 
asses adiaat daa Peg uve 
Sloka 42.—Indra has a white four-tusked elephant, 


the fhunderbolt in his hand and another characteristic, 
viz , a third eye placed horizontally on his forehead. 


Tear Redegear wewisa a ada deaq | 
Ye Va? are arenes ar ft@aray ies 
Sloka 43.—On the head of Lord Siva, a digit of 
the Moon should be placed; his ensign, is a bull ; he has 
a third eye, high on his fore-head; he has a trident in 
one hand and a bow called Pinaka in the othcr. Or, he 
may be represented as having Parvati for his left half, 


qmigaawawy: Taaqgh: giana | 
qaaaraag: aa aaa waa Tes ven 
Sloka 44.—The Buddha should be represented 


seated on a lotus and luoking as if he were the father of 
q.%. 65 


514 aeedtarae [Adh. LVIII. SL. 45-49, 
mankind, very forgiving, with hands and feet marked 
with lotuses, with a serene body and sparce hair. 
There are two other readings g@iqnig and 44ishaag. The 
first means “ very dark”’ and the other ‘ well-trimmed.” 
Magorwaaie: Aaeages waaay | 
as ° Coe SN 
favqraraenl Sats Basar Tas V4 
Sloka 45.—The God of the Jains, vizg-, Jina, should 
‘Be tepresented naked, young, handsome and serene in 
appearance, with his arms reaching the knees and _ his 
breast marked with the Sri Vatsa figure. 


MAUBBLARlwSMTaIsy Bans wa: | 

SATCIEI WS Tag Taq veil 

fra: WHE TTA IER qatar | 

XN 
greayqarza: araqal aRza: Nv 
BABAUAMTS: BRIT: (MaTAAgar | 
¢ 
WASISAAWSSA HI? DARUSH! lc 
Slokas 46-48.—The Sun-God’s nose, forehead, 

shanks, thighs, cheeks and breast should be elevated. 
he should be dressed in the northern style, covering 
the body from breast to foot. [Ie holds two lotuses 
born of his hands, in his arms; wears a diadem; his 
face is adorned with car-rinys; he has a long pearl-neck- 
lace and a girdle round his waist. His face has the lus- 
tre cf the interior of the lotus; his body is covered with 
an armour; face, pleasant with a smile and hasa_ halo 
bright with gems (or circle of bright lustre of gems). 
Such a Sun is auspicious for the architect. 

° &, YON on 

Fa TF SAAT AIST TAT ANAT ATAAT | 


* “~ 


Magma wig HaqeAAAITT AT LBS 


Adh: LVIII. SI. 50-54.] secanattseara: 515 


TWMIAAR a AHURA Rat | 
MATA FRIAIUTA: HURT Well 
aot a aaa wafaaad fareng Kat | 
TATAT Tel TT TAT SAC ATT! W4 Rt 
Heyes Bila Preaadgat che: | 
MATA PUNTA aentmraq 42k 

Slokas 49-52 —An idol of the Sun, one cubit high is 


beneficial ; one that measures two cubits in height bes- 
tows wealth; those of 3 and 4 cubits lead to happiness 
and plenty respectively. When it is of larger limbs, there 
will be trouble from the king ; when of shorter limbs, the 
sculptor will be afflicted with disease; when of slender 
belly, impending famine; when of thin limbs, loss of 
wealth ; when it has injuries, the maker will die through 
the fall of a weapon; when it is bent on the left side, it 
kills his wife; on the right, it robs him of his life; when 
its eyes are turned upwards, he will become blind; when 
bent downwards, he will have worries. Thus, the good 
and bad effects of all images will have to be assessed as 
in the case of the Sun-God. 


fora avis eis aqiea Pasa | 
YS AAAS HET cTI TAMA: 1431 
TATA ATA HET BV a Pafienray | 
VISIT Ta ane Aiea qa Nee 
Slokas 58-54.—Treat the circumference of (the round 
part of) the emblem of Siva (made of wood, stone or 
gem) as the height and divide it into three parts. The 


part at the bottom should be quadrilateral; that in the 
middle, octagonal; and the last one, cylindrical. The 


516 geeareararg [Adh. LVIII. Sl. “55-57, 
quadrilateral! part must be kept in a pit in the earth, the 
middle one, in that of the pedestal ; and the pedestal 
around the pit must be equal in extent to the visible 
height. 


HANI FAT Wasa FA AAT | 


Te ad wieaae Aarara aR NYY 

Sloka 55—An emblem being too thin and long 
»destroys the country ; being devoid of a side, ruins the 
town ; and one with a wound on the head, tends to the 
ruin of the owner himself. 

MITT: BIST BaUHeAGEIHAaE: | 

VAFATSASS AT ATATSNS TTA 4S 

Sloka 56.— The group of mothers should be repre- 

sented with th: characteristics peculiar to the Gods 
whose name they bear. Revanta (Sun’s son) should be 
seated on horse-back, with the companious of hunting, 
sport, etc. ue 


The mothers must have charming breasts, slender waist, 
large buttocks, so aS to make them appear attractive- 


Qvel Gat alewa <arees TWTTTST | 
ALATA PAT TAHCS|T TecHrge oll 
Sloka 57.—-The God of death should be mounted on 
a buffalo with a club in his hand; Varuna, on a swan 
with a noose in his hand; and Kubera, on a human be: 
ing, with a pot-belly and a crown placed on the left side 
of the head. 
— FST S BIRAT: | 
eae naqgaaggaigaaras: | 
erarat: eee aaaafayea: 
AAGSASABLAAAAS SACHA BTVOUALAY | 
amnnaariademmasgaat Taal fare u 


Adh. LVIII. S]. 58..] ‘ereqanaitseara; 517 


wat aqqyat 20Sl HONPAASAeSST | 
eqyagyx: WHA AyawAAT: | 
marae: Taarar aaasiay ea: 
avite: eqazer travaqalaqraa: | 
sqazaga: aradt agReirasrcea: u 
ag: TRAAAqarsiayi ia: | 
TMBMAAIIVAT CATANH: FAT: 
gui awesqelt wags yaa: | 
sieqgiratar a Haarar: arses u 
aCemwersaga aaTgnlesray ¢ 
saat fara aan aware a 
AYA: CHF: ATBBRSTATS: | 
Qeraet famreat ta: Garqia: rary: 
AACS: Sit Brat WEFT | 
awe TEAR: agiler fRizary 
QwraaIaAara: Wars BIH: | 
AMSSt NSeTtT AATa AEA: 
awa aa Ala aT HLT | 
qaesitrtant a adt ae adtaar u 
aa FANT: Ga BMPIANAWMISASTe: | 
BSAC: MASA ATEN: Basan: ti 
gaara waar fRemraaanar | 
qivaaae go eer gq ass 
Sat HA Frat Hurst Tearka | 
at aarat g geal fawarltat 
ara war eft gear eqaanarrar | 
srdeanta went aediga u 
GS Gate aalawrzg ar | 
wrgva gage sien sar gan 


ARAVA WHAYA! WIVITST: PITA Wig | 
eatin finequaned galvceeeq kc 


518 geeaftararg (Adh, LIX. SI. 1-4. 


OR sc PT A MERE Ot 


Sloka 58 —The Lord of Siva’s hosts has an ele- 
phantine face with a single tusk, a bulging belly, a 
hatchet in his hand and a turnip of very dark foliage 
and root. 


Thus ends the 58th Adhvaya on“ Description ot Tdols.”’ 


POT SURES gato 


ATAAFAAATEATT? 1143! Ingress into the Forest. 


HUTT eaatante qatatac | 

ARSUZA: Pee y: TAAETTT aq Wet 

Slok11.—The maker of images should enter the 
forest on a favourable day, 7. e,a day presided over by 
a planet bestowing prosperity, and having an unhurt as- 
terism—when good foretokens are discovered by the 
astrologer and when there are auspicious omens pre- 
scribed for a journey. 


aTAAMgUs7TVA AAT TATTTL | 
SUaaRT TENT TATRA NR 
HAMIAMAAIS Asa TaASeawar: | 
arrdaleiaiisayniagzagrsa al 


ata anaes: gaa: wy: RavaqsggaTet | 
afiaaad nen gareqat aaegeny il 
Slokas 2-4.-—Those trees that grow -in cemeteries, 
roads, temples, ant-hills, zardens, hermitages (penance- 
groves), sacred spots, near the confluences of rivers, 
those that are reared being watered, those that are stunt- 
ed, those that have grown beside others, those that’ are 
infested with creepers, that are broken by thunderbolt 


Adh, LIX. SI. 5-7.]  gérvaGaatseara: 819 


and storm, one that has fallen by itself, that is broken by 
elephants, that has withered{ is burnt by fire, that con- 
tains bee hive—all these trees are to be avoided. Those 
that have soft leaves, ilowers and fruits will be auspi- 
cious. Going to the desired (cliosen) tree, he should 
worship it with food and flowers. 


MAIagT THA GHITas Yar (aalatary | 
BARRE AAA aS HT i 
EEDICH MARAE CT YRA-CAA TART: | 
THeSRRAT AIGA ALA BRT Ul 


Slokas 5-6.—Deodar, sandalwood, Sami and Ma- 
dhuka are good fur the images insialied by Brahmins ; 
Arishta, Aswattha, Nhadira and Bilwa bestow prosperity 
on the Kshatriyas; Jivaka, Khadira, Sindhuka and Sy- 
andana on the Vaisyas; und Tinduka, Kesara, Surja, 
Arjuna, Mango and Sala, on the Sudras. 

e 

AA A BISA: 

Ys: AalgTM 4 Yi aeqaaar | 

Tawi MAA Aa HB BRAT 

MATA Zwaeal: AA aaray | 

Stas: afaaaa erga: Beat 

qsatat yaar: MMi TH: Bae b 

AAPLAMBeaT Want Was: waar a 


fey a Adal a | Eat soles AGUS Taq | 
FAUNAS I eat gaa leaquar: T lig 


Sloka 7.—Since an emblem of Siva or an image 
should’ be installed acgording tothe directions of the 
tree, the different directions as well as the upside and 
downside should be marked on the tree. 


520,  aueeifigerateg [Adh, LIX, SI. 8-12, 


awe Giga: | 
quaentar sat smaraerraiarar | 
Qrat: Aeq Basar: wWheayey g szw7 
MAAANCHTATUITIAiaHis MASA | 
Hl: FAUIAGA TS AATIT=T [Ic 
AAA ANIAAYAM AAT AU THAN | 
HAT TA Tat as AeysT FT TAT US 
Slokas 8-9.—After worshipping the tree with Payasa, 
sweets, rice, curds, sesamum seeds, edibles, etc., wine, 
flowers, incenses and perfumes, Gods, manes, Goblins, 
demons, serpents, Asuras, hosts of Siva, Ganesa, etc. 
should be worshipped at night. Thereafter, touching 
the tree, one should recite the following : 


adivagee at faq aftaiera: | 

ame Te Ta fafaag aengeay like" 
wae Zaller Tala aa ais Beleat taacgwy | 
AAT Ta WReITIgT ARed Weagq AAistq IFT 122! 

Slokas 10-11.—“ Oh Tree, you have been selected 

for the worship of the particular deity. Salutation to 
you! I worship you in accordance with the rules; 
kindly accept it. May all those beings that dwell in this 
tree fix their residence elsewherc: after receiving the offer- 


ings made according to rules. May they forgive us now; 
We bow to them.” 


aa aad afesa Asan inal Ay aa_e | 
mVaSAT aT Foro cago Haeal grag eV 


Sloka 12.—In the morning, one should sprinkle the 
tree with water and cut it on the north-eastern side with: 


LIX. 13-14, LX. 1.3.] —- siteaitseara: 521 


RR UENCE Ee Am et rebar re ne PL te geste "iy panne tease 


® 
an axe sineared with honey and ghee. The remaining 
parts are to be cut in a clock-wise manner 


TAT Wiaasanceaaagt ayn Aq | 
AAT THNTH AMSAT EM ATTTTT ATT 12 VU 
Sloka 13.—If the tree falls down on the east, north- 
east, or north, it augurs prosperity; if it falls on the 
South-east, south, south-west, west and north-west, there ; 


will be in order, outbreak of fires, disease, disease, 
disease and destruction of horses. 
TAMA Aaaeaaa MaraasseqzaTal: | 
STATA ALAA A MSS Tr AAT aAsST TAT SAT UV 
Sloka 14.—What has not been mentioned here in ' 
connection with the topic of ‘ entering a forest’ {viz.. the 
fall of trees (Adh. XLIII-20), the cutting and the interior 
of trees was already (Adh. XLIII-19) explained by me 
in connection with Indra’s banner and construction of 
houses. (Adh. LIII-122) Those ideas have to be applied 
here too. 


Thus ends the 59th Adhyaya on “ Entering a Forest. ” 


MaaMasiaswra: Noll Installation of Idols 


fafa meat gacaaaaed ga: wat | 
ANTATSAZT WATATBATSAY 1211 

Ga att fa: Am TAHT WEeTaTa: | 
mimcat Ry Ta: Heo: LTTE BA UN 
Rat Rsawat wasaqrat g wea ca | 


avatanad fats Ttat wrals dn 
ta 66 


522 | aeeafgarary =[Adh. LX. SI. 4-6. 


Se 


a A, a hl nee 


Slokas 1-3.—A wise man ought to construct in the 
north or east a piatform for the installation ceremony 
with four archways and covered with the sprouts of aus~- 
picious trees. For the eastern side of the platform are 
laid down variegated garlands and flags; for the south- 
eastern one, red ones; for the southern and south-wes- 
tern sites, black ones. They must be white in the west, 
pe'e-white in the north-west, variegated in the north and 
yellow in the north-east. = 


MY? MASAI TISAI BeAal Tal Alaa | 
araleara alaraal ara giear waa en 
TATA Bild Aataale Bala aaa | 
YS FT Aeied Asi afraraar RT Wl 
Slokas 4-5.—An idol, made of wood or clay bestows 
long life, prosperity, strength and victory ; one made of 
precious stone tends to the weal of the world; one of 
gold bestows health; one of silver, fame; one of copper, 
increase of children; and an idol or emblem of Siva 
made of stone, acquisition of immense landed property. 
AUT A BRAT: | 
qa BUSA Yar Ay: Wasa AAT | 
atacll giegr at wast awrite a 
Usd Sifaar Aart aaa Waaraat | 
Hema Wer arar qauofarsyar uv 
VFI Aaa WAST Ss A @raara | 
TAMIA TagIesta AF Fed 1G 11 


Slokas 6.—An image being hurt by a wedge destroys 
the headman and the family ; one being damaged by a 
hole causes diseases, troubles and ruin. 


Adh. LX. SI. 7-11.) givaatssara: 523 
aa @ SSA: | 
Ma AE IEA A J TIAAHSAT Ay | 
fSxoqeay at yx agzevsit wat u 
qreqaey wiieagiiecaaa aay gar: | 
WAATATHAMI NIAAA eaAeaaanyz soit 


Sloka 7.—After smearing with cowdung the floor in 
the centre of the platform, covering it with sand and 
then with holy grass, the image should be placed wjth — 
its head resting on a throne and feet on a pillow. 

TATA AUTANATATAT: BUTTS | 
HRVIASAAA: Aaa: FAs lel 
~ ~ Q “ ~ iN 
SIITTASITATTCHI BAM (TAIT AAIzyY | 
TaIVT Taig: aS Mags: Su 
CA ° ~ & 
qaiacent @lat Badeatalagy aang: 
CA * nt 
AAAS: YUSAT AAT? UZoll 

Slokas 8-10.—The image with its head pointing to 
the east should be bathe’ with a decoction of Plaksha, 
Aswattha, Indian fig, Sirisha agd banyan mixed with all 
kinds of herbs bearing auspicious names (such as Jaya, 
Jayanti, Jeevanti, Jeevaputri, Punarnava and Vishnu- 
kranta, etc.), with sacred grass and the like, with clay 
dug up by elephants and bulls from mountains, ant-hills, 
river-banks at the confluences, and that of lotus-lakes, 
mixed with water from holy rivers along with the five 
products of cows and with scented water containing gold 
and gems, to the accompaniment of the sounds of vari- 
ous musical instruments and of the chantings of Punyaha 
and other Vedic hynins, 


teat aleziser ara snaesateeez | 
THEA RwTSN Garey cTaorifweay 112 VN 


524 : geeaigararg [Adh LX. SI. 12-15, 


Sloka 11.—The High-Priests should recite in the 
east hymns relating to Indra; and in the south-east, to 
Fire ; and they should be honoured with monetary gifts. 


Tt ta: qencaeacaagias Rit Bea | 
aaiatraia aa teprdiegersteatay 2 it 
\ Core 
YAPSSTASA FEUSACHISHSA YA | 
ala: walaaret ar adel ara wT 1123 
Slokas 12-13.—The Priest should worship the Fire 
with the hymns sacred to that God who is to be in- 
stalled. The symptoms of Fire have been already ex- 
plained by me on the occasion of dealing with the 
raising of “ Indra’s Banner’’ (Adh. XLIII-32). A fire 
filled with smoke, turned to the left and sending sparks 
continuously is not auspicious. The priest's failing in 
memory and moving forward are also inauspicious. 


alaagnial aga Wat gqAaea: | 
gaat ardinat aaa eats: Fag (ee! 
Sloka 14.—When the image has been bathed, clad 
in a new garment, beautifully adorned with ornaments 


and worshipped with flowers and perfumes, the priest 
who instals it should lay it on a well-spread bed. 


gat antarertine: araaaiaare | 
Saqacaees His aeagd Falq U24ll. 

Sloka 15.—After the sleeping idol has been properly 
consecrated with the materials for waking up, accompa- 
nied by dance and songs, the installation should be done 
at a time prescribed by the astrologer, ¢ ¢. in the 
bright half of the northern solstice. 


Adh. LX. S]. 16.19.)  afeaafsvura: 525 


AMIS FAATGASTA? TACIT: | 
Malaya AAA araa IE 

HA WS AYI area Tanta arate | 
aeal fawoqaad fafaaaieaitearaqH 20ll 
wmiqacagsaaraeqdiy aissass | 
HANA At Was WT TA Ail Mel 


Slokas 16-18.—After worshipping the idol with flo- | 
wers, cloths and unguents, along with the sounds of 
eonchs and musical instruments, it should be taken into 
the sanctum sanctorum with all precaution round the 
temple, 2. ¢., from left to right. Then giving copious 
oblations and worshipping Brahmins and those of the 
religious assembly, the idol should be placed in the pit of 
the pedestal in which sa gold-piece, has been deposited. 
By honouring especially the installer, astrologer, Brah- 
mins, the men of the assembly and the carpenter, one 
will get all blessed things in this world and heaven in 
the next. 


PsorraiT Tar aaig aad: ara: THAT 

aITATATT Woes Bala Fe fang fagerent: | 

TET qaaa Bieawaal aATy f frarat fag- 

a a dagaita: aha aaa arar Bear 281 

Sloka 19.— The installing priests of Vishnu are 

known as Bhagavatas; of the Sun as Magas; of Siva, 
as Pasupathas (ash-smeared ones); of the divine Mothers 
as those adepts in the rites of the Mothers’ circle; of 
Brahman, Brahmins ; of the Buddha, (all benevolent) of 
serene mind, as Sakyas; of the Jains, as naked monks. 
These different priests have to perform, according to the 


526 geedrearara (LX. 20-22. LXI. L 
rules peculiar to each sect, the ceremony for the God, 
whose devotees they are. 
kA ~~ AR ay al Ly 
sqnaa ae tata FT aiaane | 
x, AA ax @a 
ay fur Raia aisadigameraa: R01 | 
eC la as ant 
VTA aT aaa Ag | 
aaa Rasaae arat erga aeAZ FVII 
Stokas 20-21.—The installation of deities is favoura- 
ble in the northern solstice, bright half of the month, 
when the Moon is posited in a Varga belonging to Jupi- 
ter, when the Ascendant is a fixed sign and a fixed Na- 
vamsa is rising, benefics occupy the 5th, 9th, and the 
Kendra houses ; and malefics are in the Upachaya houses 
(3rd, 6th, 10th and 1}th) and when the Moon is in any 
of the asterisms, viz., the 3 Uttaras, Rohini, Mrigasira, 
Anuradha, Revati, Sravana, Tishya and Swati and on 
any convenient day except Tuesday. 
ameatae aaa ataiat fag aa Haq | 
aaa alsa gaas aT URI 
Sloha 22.—Thus have I expounded succinctly this 
subject conferring benefits on humanity ; but in the work 
of Savitra, the consecration and setting up are treated 
at length separately—or the consecration and setting 
up of the Sun are separately expounded in detail in that 
Sastra. 
Thus ends the 69th Adhyaya on “ Installation of Idols’. 


TSA I&8il Signs of Cows.. 


GUA NE TeRala area qq fad qaarayq | 
WA AAAs PASAT: aatearaearapqarshrara | et 


Adh. LXI. Sl. 2-4.) qesigaaitsxara: 527 


prone een namemarensnnarinenmenae init eee mars: remem 


Sloka 1.—~—Here I am abridging the signs of cows 
that were taught by Parasara to his disciple Brihadratha: 
All varieties of them are auspicious; still I shall deline- 
ate them on the authority of the Sastras. 


AASSMEN FHA T BAST AAs | 
TASANSAMN: BAN VTATTANTL Ml 
UAHA: TSIAVVSlaal AaAATTET: 
RAR TEMT ATALTT qAGUA NEWT 
BqNAUAaIA|l Je atladstatiageraal | 
HHS BATE AST Alansaryay |v 


Slokas 2-4,—Cows with dirty and rough eyes, shed- 
ding tearsand resembling those of rats are not auspi- 
cious ; nor are those that have flat shaking horns, that are 
black and red in colour or have the colour of donkeys. 
So also are those that have ten, seven or four teeth, 
drooping face, without horns, depressed face, of short and 
thick neck, middle resembling barley corn, broken . hoofs, 
very long blackish tongue, very small or very big ankle- 
joints, big huinp, weak body and fewer or more limbs. 

AU SA TUNA: 

aracit Brat arat Sey a aA al: yar: | 

ABA ASTHMA BI ATATATAr: I 

SAAN AYSAAl SVIAATAL A] A? BAT: I 

faUNaisal TA WWaAraraaeal: Il 

TCHEYSTS AWA GAAra: Yul a at: | 

FAAIUA FERC AM RAT THST: i 

SaaAMaAT GAA ALLSHTATA: | 

aaaeaae tar rea waar ar: i 

Aa: BAIT TWA AYTTST AAA | 


528 a avditaraa [Adh. LXI. SI. 5-9. 


vraag wyaraararym: Areraaais: | 
waka aala AT WT 14M 
Wag? Bis: RS at a Waar area | 
HTBAUS Me: AAT JIA TWART Ali 
Slokas 5-6.—A bull toa with the above characteris- 
tics, large and hanging testicles, breast full of veins and 
cheeks covered with thick veins, and one which urinates 
-in three different jets bring no luck. One tawny or dark- 
red, having cat's eyes is not good even for Brahmins. 
One with dark lips, palate and tongue and continually 
blowing, is pernicious to the flock. 
wqoupeary: aige HoraaTg | 
VEMasly Bsa Jataraazal TTA: Ihsil 
Sloka 7.—A buli that makes too much dung, has 
gem-like horns (or has too big penis and horns), white 
belly and colour of a spotted deer should be abandoned 
though born at home. For, it would otherwise bring 
ruin upon the flock. 


TTAB Uae MMVTa aa reat: | 

fanaa a za ails zea: sitzeta: llcl 
Sloka 8.—A bull whose body is filled with dark 
spots resembling flowers, has greyish red colour, and 


cat’s eyes, brings no luck even to a Brahmin who 
accepts it. 


y daguea ware wensa aisan: Hyatar: | 
BANAT SAAT FA A ATT: leit 
Sloka 9.—Those bulls that have weak necks, tremu- 
lous eyes, stunted growth, and raise their hoofs as if from 


mire, while being yoked or engaged in bearing loads 
cannot carry burdens. 


Adh. LXI. SI. 10.14.] quer@azitseara: 529: 


aa S Tere: | 
MA AUTATCBIST: om ce 
araineiqerna gear quate: 
VENgalai: warqagea aaa Z| 
arqdgr waraa aravate faagar 
ATACAAUA GAA CHAM AA SisISIy | 
RAITAAIN AHI WITT ll Qo 
MAAAZAGUT SYSER WeHSTT A: | 
PATI AT AM ATA ATT TE Ut 112 Vil 
THLPUNSI THETA ATTA | 
aeHraAATTHeTS: TAIT? AAT: La 
Slokas 10-12.—Bulls that have soft, touching and 
red lips, small buttocks, red palate and tongue, small, 
short and erect ears, well-shaped belly, touching shanks, 
red and compact hoofs, strong breast, plump hump, soft, 
smooth and slender hair, red and slender horns, thin tail 
reaching the ground, red eye-corners, long breath, a 
leonine shoulder and a thin and small dewlap are 
honoured as being good runners. 
arma sera a eo: | 
Pe , 
TAC AAMAS! AHUMATHA Ts UI 
Sloka 13.—Bulls with hairy circles turning left on 
the left side and with those turning right on the right- 
side are favourable; so also are those whose shanks 
resemble those of antelopes. 
Aaa eR gs ant: equtaraentn: i 
qieoyeenicait: aes Ta A AIA UV. 
Sloka 14.—Bulls with eyes hued like the beryl-stone, 


or surrounded . by white rings, or formed like a water- 
q. a 67 


530. . geediarar [Adh. LXI. Sli 15-29." 


bubble, and exhibit thick eye-lashes, and unbroken hinder 
parts of hoofs, are good and fit for carrying loads. 
AUT T Meera: | 
Brsuiasiiway wareawlas ya | 
afgurat agraea: @ BeTHeNares: tl 
TINT Asana: fiTT stro: | 
“ ~ 
HAMUISSAA FUSAM ACTAT? NUM 
ACO A ° x 
o wera aqaSeamis: | 
Tal Aaa BasMIeay Tah: 12 
Slokas 15-16—A bull that has wrinkles on its 
snout, a cat’s face, is white on the right side, or has the 
colour of lotus, lily or lac, has a good tail, speed similar 
to that of a horse, hanging testicles, stomach like that of 
sheep, or narrow groins and breast, is certainly fit for 


burden and travel, equal to a horse in speed and condu- 
cive of good results. 


raat: frees tata were: | 
gal AIM JARS JIS asa: sw 12911 
Sloka 17.-- A white bull that is tawny in eyes, cop- 
per-coloured in horns and eyes (sight), that has a large 
mouth (or face), is termed Hamsa (swin) and is declared 
to bring good luck and prosperity to the flock. 
AVAUSAIUTAATUNT THEHHA | 
HEI BUAAMATIT SSI Ga GEFIM: Nil 
Sloka 18.— One whose tail touches the graund, 
horns and eyes red, hump prominent, colour a mixture 
of white, red and yellow, makes its owner a lord of 
wealth ere-long. | 
Tl a aeReVyeIIA Asiy gaassd | 
PATHS gig Ve Haranaaishe 1128 


Adh..LXII. Sl.1-] — faftersitseara: 531 


Sloka. 19.—One that has one white foot also brings 
‘good luck even if it be of any colour. Where one with 
all auspicious signs is not available, another of partially 
good promise is acceptable. 

SUT BT TAA: | 

BLATAT A GAgAAgAGe aH: | 

aqingatia segzazaiea: 0 

THAT THES: | 

fagenrar AIWESI CSTE: SHTA: u 

Ya SUA BRS TrTysarsey: | 

GwMgaeat ara: Gea: Taarear: u 

qa: eemas fretiagaras y 

CAUMATSVEN: WHAT: i 

ayggaaeata: Taregie tarkenkar: | 

FUR ATAM al: SHIT AAIes>: i 

Uae wiser war wit ara ws qtwar: | 

aradarrmaagenr shana Fu 

TAA GABA Wear: i 

AVAZINAY AAAS: 

ana saat aie ara a ga: 1 

eanqeHaToTAAaseHT ACTA: 

@ git: agar ara wagaqaaa: | 

Thus ends the 61st Adhyaya on “ the Signs of Cows.’”’. 


ASINT WER Signs of Dogs. 
qa: WAAUTTA STATO: afeerera fem 
maga BWiagrmatary gs ats a | 
BAS Tae TPTACT Toil | Teal Ay 
WS Qld T BUT Tgeget feet ae-Te uh 


$32 | . caggeaigarara, ( LXID. 2, LXIIL 1. 


Sloka 1—A dog three of whose legs have five 
nails and the right fore-foot six, whose lips and muzzle 
are red, which has the gait of a lion, smells the ground 
while running, has a shaggy tail, eyes like those of a 
bear, ears hanging aid soft, such a dog being kept-in a 
house promises ere-long great prosperity to the owner. 

aura ae: | 


MA: Wal: Val AST Ady WANA | 
"" quqacalaareal venaie: etama: 1 

agl ian gar aia BIS waies aur 

Ray age wait sq afareisaar i 

@ ar qe uel fra aeofa aise: | 
Te WS TI YATE TWA AAs Waar Ayaan: | 
am Ges RRIEraMT aT aT TE FUR Ua ger zi 

Sloka 2-—A bitch with five nails’ on each foot, six 
on the left fore-foot, with eyes surrounded by white 
rings, with a crooked tail, and having a brown colour and 


hanging ears, protects the country if she is properly nur- 
tured. | 


Thus ends the 62nd Adhyaya on “ the Signs of Dogs ” 


SRHTTAMNT G31) Signs of Cocks. 


FHELNITIWCMSMATAATG TSS: (a | 


Tf Gauss a a qige: a greasy 12H 
Sloka 1.—A white cock with straight feathers and 
talons, with red face, nails and crest, and which crows 
pleasantly at dawn, bestows prosperity on the King, 
country and horses. 


Adh. LXII. Sf 2-3.] eq:utastsvare: 533 


AUT HTT: | 
AMARA: YSAMARTYATSa: | 
RAGNFIS: BReawTyS: TAs I 
ward aadtiat afeacl: saraaq: 
AULA: Vysite entzain fea: a 
aagensasdion Ravaqoian Gar: | 
data facta aus fmgar 0 
aatiat at at wevreay aft Pres 
arya goals agi aeey VPA: | 
TUM AAA aAyTIIy TaIG- 
bat ‘ e 
A TR Asaseyr FRAGT WAIT: Ul 
Sloka 2.—A cock which has a-neck of the shape of 
barley corn, which has the colour of Jujube fruit, a big 
head, or looks beautiful with various culours is commend: 
abie in fight. So-.also one which has the colour of 
honey or bee brings victory. One that possesses con- 
trary characteristics is not auspicious. One ‘that has an 
emaciated body, afeeble voice and lame legs is also not 
good, 
THRE A agar Teraainat acre | 
al falta gat aifgar arraaaqaatiaraa: TET 
Sloka 3.—A hen with a gentle and sweet voice, 
glossy body and beatiful face and eyes, brings for a long 
time abundance of wealth, fame, ne and valour 


to kings. 
Thus ends the 63rd Adhyaya on “ the Signs of Cocks. - 


REE, berm 


FATINY URI” Signs of Tortoises: 


wHiceTAATT AeushAse: 
SVTATITAM ATT Bi | 


4 
‘ eee S. 
5:34 | Sabie: (Adh. LYEVSI. 1-3. 
eran a eee reer eeeeememmemencetneateenememetirn nace nner an as OTE ESET aS 


eae en 

Sloka 1.~A tortoise that has the colour of crystal or 
silver, that is marked with blue lines, that has a pot-like 
body, a beautiful back-bone, or has a red body, and is 
ornamented with spots in the form of white mustard 
seeds, gives one the over-lordship of all kings. when be- 
ing kept at home, ~ 

marys MeghfaascayaT | 
TAR aT TESTA a: ASH grt UsTE NAN 

Sloka 2,—A tortoise that has a body dark in 
cqlour.similar to collyrium or bee, that is beautified by 
spots, that has a full-grown body, a serpentine head ora 
broad neck, also conduces to oe prosperity of the realms 
of kings. 
aqaRaz wowraieete setonateion ater: | 
PTAA TAT HTT ae BG: Hat ARV aes 131 

Sloka 3.—A tortoise that has the lustre of beryl, a 
thick neck, a triangular shape, hidden cavities and a fine 
back-bone is auspicious. Such a tortoise should be kept 
in a pleasure-lake or in a basin full of water by kings for 
the sake of auspiciousness. 

eat & at: 

ergeuisdhereierst trast: | 

oa Aqdacidt dt wagers: 0 

aaa Sfeornad users at waa | 

isrdciey qeedeqara: 

aarge Preth @ eat whe a 

wiigaaiad faery, et uefaaat 


Thus ends the 64th Adhyaya an i 2 Signs of Tortoises.” 


Adh. LIV."SL 1.57) @qaiaiaivedera: ‘ggg 
STITT neat Bigns of Gente. : 


sngargieqeafiecns aaEMeTeAe l 
GAs QCA ATA AeVNSIT TATeaT F Ul 
Sloka 1.—I1 shall now expound the auspicious and - 
inauspicious signs of goats. Those that have nine, ten 
or eight teeth bring good luck and should be kept at 
home. Those that have seven teeth must be abandoned. 
ago queaqad we quand aaia | 
aahragraieaaniat waaay zn 
_ Sloka 2.—A white goat that has a dark circle on 
the right side conduces to good results. Similarly, one 
that is dark, red or blue like an elk, with a white circle 
on the right side is very auspicious. 
aaIgIarad 1 Essarat wee a Aya: | 
want ganegecarar fearqray F131 
Sloka 3.—The thing that hangs like a breast from 
the neck of goats is to be known as ‘ Mani’. One with 
a single Mani is of good augury; and those that have 


two or three are ee alispicious. 
rer: aa Tua TAI aeoneays | 
qaifran fravat aan afredpcoray ett 


Sloka 4.—All goats that have no horns, that are 
completely white or completely: black or are half-white or 
half-dark, or half-brown and paar are auspiciots and 
bring good luck. 


| Rafa Qe ard = asa || 
aq gar fepegat ages ar Bera ze stl 


536 : weedigeray § [Adh. “LXV. SI. 68. 


Sloka 5.—A goat that marclies in front of the flock, 
plunges first into the water, that has a white head, or six 
dark specks on the head is of good augury. (Such a goat 
is called Kuttaka.) 

aur a aw | 

qui aa aria aargt wiiamag 1 

qita ez fase ae asst quitada: 0 

aA SA a essay WATE TAT | 
Sua: at a Heo ar Waarant as all 

Sloka 6.—A goat with spotted neck or head, with 
the colour of pounded sesamum (a mixture of white and 
yellow), red eyes, dark or white feet, is commendable. 
So also is one that is white or dark (#2@). 

aut a ay: | 

MA As PENAL: HE: AAMT HSI ar 4 

qamagn wer we at Tealteaa: uS 

~S ba —_ 
Ts PUGS AT AeA Hea aaa Sa | 
at at Bala Aasse He | A TiAATITIT: liv 

Sloka 7.—A white goat with dark testicles and a 
dark band in the middle is auspicious. So also is one 
that walks slowly with a jingling sound. (afz=). 

aa SMT: | 

aee ausz aie wa: Bosaga: | 

avy Hira Gea get a: aie graze: u 

ASTANA Al AL ATH TWSTSTL aie: | 
@ AAA PASSA? -Wiegeay AVI Ici 

Sloka 8—A goat with blue hair on the head, and 
blue feet, or one with white fore-part and blue hind part 
brings good luck and the following is the verse composed 
by Garga. 


Aah. LXW'S 3 21,0-11,] vareiteaitsvara: 637 
schurtaipesenouen = Roe n> onic 
; ny nag: ro Se 
ax cee ee gaadiearaa: | | 
eur sa iets Tresaresreay at: | 
aie 
a HH WoRMMes (aA araTTa: | 
Caanfteert fant aa sates TBs: 
vert vat 1 
remap ay mara: NIWA ZA AUS. | 
“aie Gade: earedtsiy wiGatza: o 


ou: SiTeMI West aA | 
\ sexs; Pam Gar qseais Tarra a AN 
| ihe 4 ' The four classes of goats, viz, Kuttaka, 
Kaci , Jatin, and Vamani are the sons of the Goddess 
Jt Wor ih thai do not dwellina ideas place. ” 
TUE TR: aby pakele We ATES SAAT Prat \ 
EUR fA TaRTHIA AIST F-TWVTATSARL Nott 
Siok Hci 10.—Now, the goats that bleat like don- 
keys, that have crooked or erect tails, mis-shapen nails, 
inauspicious colours, cut-ears, elephantine heads aad 
dark palate and’ tongue, are not auspicious. 
CALAN \ ~N 
Ts TAMA: TR PT A AAs TATA | 
ps on ran ran ~ Ae 
TUT Tala qaaat aeans gala za: Faz a 
Sloka 11—The goats that have commendable co- 


lours, Manis, hornless heads and red eyes give happiness, 
fame and wealth to men when worshipped at home, 


Thus ends the 65th Adhyaya on " the Signs of Goats he a 


as 68 


538 quedigarara [Adh. LX\4'1, SI. 1.4, 
a ey 


L, 
Aiberpainphica, — Stet io ortega 


Hasan kil Signs of Horses. 


alamantagzanecargamaetisine 
MUAHITIN Gaatagal <antigge 7: | 
APIAMAITT: THAATaaaS AeA ST 
ast aalqag wala Acad: aaatara Heaq 12 
Sloka 1.—A horse is perfect or flawless iv; limbe 
when it has the neck and sockets of eyes, long * rump «Au 
heart, broad ; palate, lips and tongue, red; skit, hair 
tail, fine ; hoofs, face and gait, fine ; ears, upp: lip a 
root of the tail, short; shanks, knees and thizhs. rour.” 
white and uniform teeth, and a beautiful apjearan, |, 
‘Such a horse always conduces to the destruction of the 
King’s enemies. . 
AYUNAAVTRSUNAIFR CAAA | 
WRAUNARES IT Ts asagiaqay qaqa’ lie 
Sloka 2.—Inauspicious are the chargers that have 
hairy circles under the eyes, the jaws, on the cheeks, 
heart, throat, nose, temple, hip, abdomen, knee, scrotum, 
navel, shoulder, anus, (or junction of neck and collar- 
bone), right side uf stomach and legs. "ig 


a qysediean wasaaazalsh fea: | 


Hgts Saeaea Garvan 3H 
Sloka 8.—Auspicious are the hairy circles on the up- 
per lip, throat, ears, in the middle of the back, near the 
brows, on the lips, haunches, fore-legs, upper parts of left 
legs, flanks and the space between the brows. 


* det aa Ga BoaIg qT yarral: | 
waTAAT welt Vs eget Za ieh 


i 


LXVI,5, LXVIL 1-2] arnsfeastsvara: 539: 


‘Slokas 4.—Among the (ten) necessary hairy circles, 
there is one on the lower side of the upper lip, one in the 
hairs of the fore-head, two between the belly and the 
navel, two just above that, two on the head and two on 
the breast. 

Tetaea: Rransraaia OPCS IRIEEL 
| Tee TA THT: viaaagizaesnta tenes BI | 
aecataman faaktata: aisan: wage 
Hla qaing‘acasaaal cag ay il 
Sloka 5.—A colt (of one year) has six white teeth, 
which become tawny when it is two years old; when it 
is three years, the incisors fall and reappear; when four 
years, the next teeth; when five years, the last teeth. 
The same three teeth will after every subsequent period 
of three years become black, yellow, white, coloured like 
@t@, coioured like black salt, .wax, conch shell, become 
hollow, shaky and at last fall out. 
“*-* Thus ends the 66th Adhyaya on “ the Signs of Horses.” 


glasaty 189i! Signs of Elephants. 


AANAaea: AAAMeEl FT BTVsg a Has Bary | 
WAS AHNTAAATA ATETeAATAS, ATI UI 

' Sloka 1.—The elephants whose tusks bear the colour 
of honey, which have limbs proportionately, developed, 
are not too stout, nor too lean, are fit for work, have 
equal limbs, back-bone similar to a bow and hips like 
those of boars are called Bhadras. 


qalsy HQaTa: Wyrsq seaaweagat ney | 
Set a By: ae tad Seq ceqerqayTa 121) 


MO =». ettrfeevara, [Adh. EXVIT SI. 36, 


Sloka 2.—The characteristics of the class designated 
Manda are: a slack breast, loose folds on the waist, 
.a hanging belly, a thick skin and neck,, a huge abdomen 
and root of the tail, and the look of a lion. 

AAG LATTASAG ATTA SACI EM: | 
VSANAG TH aa! aSiaia Saataaraas 3M 


Sloka 3.—Those that have short lip, tail and penis, 
slender feet, neck, teeth, trunk- and ears and Jarge cyes 
are known as Mrigas. Those that belong to the class of 
Sankirna have the characteristics of the above classes 
intermingled. 


Seize is another reading- 
cara: Ay ae Ceqqel FT ge TeTeaTay | 
wReTgay arqaal ag inaa sh TATATS BN 
Sloka 4.—The height, of the Mriga is 5 cubits ; 
length, 7 cubits; and girth, 8 cubits. These numbers in- 
creased by one are those of the Manda (2. €.,6, 8 and 9 
respectively); by two, of Bhadra (7, 9:and 10 cubits). The 
Sankirna has no fixed dimensions. 
BZA WW etal Way az siAABAUARTA: | 
SO Weauea ane agiiatas agi fra: MN 
Sloka 5.—The colour of the Bhadra and its ichor Js 
green ; of Manda and its ichor, yellow; of Mriga, darls ; 
and of Sankirna, mixed, ' 
TUMBACATA Holasaan 
Rega WZwa4raaar | 
qtrqarrataerarig— 
| eeketlafergeearageat: 1A. . 


Adh. LXVII. SI. 7-10.) aaafeaarseara: 544: 
ae ey 
 fatofactzaataasregen: 
Riiaaseaasganaday | 
TANTNUAAITHU VATS 
VA? TAqTATTH AAA [9 | 


Slohas 6-7.—Auspicious are the elephants that have 
lips, palate and mouth red, eyes like those of a sparrow ; 
tusks, glossy and raised at the tips ; face, long and broad; 
the back-bone arched, long, not protruding and lying 
deep ; the frontal globes, like the back of a tortoise and 
covered with thin and scarity hair; the ears, jaws, navel, 
forehead and penis broad ; the nails convex like a tor- 
toise, numbering 18 or 20; the trunk round and covered 
with three lines; the hairs fine, and ichor and breath, of 
good odour. . 


aig anaeaeaaesien: | 
PETIAATAREA Feat YAIAHIGAT lel 


Sloka 8.—iephants with long fingers and red tip of 
the trunk, with a voice .(trumpeting) like the thunder of 
clouds, and with a long, broad and round neck, bring 
luck to the King. | 


The commentator states that by finger is meant the fleshy 
projection in its foot, and by J®nHt, the whole pad of foot. 


MAM AMR AAI FSAIMATRATUATIAT | 
CATH IRS HA TAA SATS UaATANSyT (SI 
WCAFAGLACHIUNS Lal FT TITTY | 
THM TYTN WRT MIVA ETHSTA 12 ol 


Slokas 9-10.—Elephants that are never intoxicated, 
that have too mahy or too few riails.and Jimbs, that are 


542° gratia (Adh: LXVIT. SL. 142, 


crooked or dwarfed, that have tusks similar to the horns 
of a goat, that have prominent testicles, that lack the 
extremity of the trunk, that have the pafate dusky, blue, 
variegated or black, that have small tusks or no tusks at 
all, or are without sex; as well as a female elephant 
that has some characteristics of the male, and one that 
is pregnant, should the King order to be removed to 
another country, as they produce very dire consequences. 


Here H*s, aaa, AH are particular types of elephants. 


Thus ends the 67th Adhyaya on ™ the Signs of Elephants.” 


Fersany li§cil Signs of Men. 


THAT AA ATE TTAAT - 
ALAIFMAAATHAL | 

at ant a fatwaa gusisaalea 
aygasala Bara a 20 


Sloka 1.—A clever astrologer who knows the phy- 
sical features of human beings, carefully observes in the 
beginning according to the rules, the height, weight, gait, 
compactness, strength, complexion, glossiness, voice, na- 
tural character, courage, impressions of previous birth, 


parts of the body and natural lustre, and reveals the past 
and the future. 


HATA ALAS BASAL 

—— Peerget erase TTT | 

sat faraitrefedh araqeyent 
gain a ql aqaaTe Ril 


‘Adh. LXVIIL Sl. 35.) weaitastseara: ' §43. 


Sloka 2.—A King’s feet do not perspire, have soft 
soles, have the lustre of the interior of a lotus, have com- 
pact toes, beautiful and red niils, fine heels, warmth, no 
veins, well-sunken ankle-joints and an arch ilike the back 
of a tortoise. | 


aUareqgearea wat Arwracaat 
aya aya A TUT aifeergraNay | 
WTIseR BUTTE dra Aedeat 
ARH TBA aaa Waraeareay 113 


Sloka 3—Poverty and grief are produced by feet 
that have the shape of winnowing baskets, that are very 
rough, that have white nails, that are long or crooked, 
that are full of veins, that are very dry and have far- 
removed toes; travelling, by those that are elevated in 
the middle ; destruction of the family, by those that are 
tawny; murder of a Brahmin, by those whose soles have 
the colour of burnt earth ; and cohabitation with forbid- 
den women, by those that are yellow. 


Wawwaqdarasg feces | 
SUAAAATAIA YIU AAtlaqs PUTS IITFE lvlh 
Sloka 4.—The shanks being round, with sparse and 
thin hair, the thighs, beautiful and resembling elephant’s 
trunk, and the knees well-developed (fleshy) and even, 
make one a king; while shanks resembling those of a 
jackal or dog make one penniless. 


Was HIB lara FF Fa siteawiarrg | 

SHAT ATT GTA: Baa Pheer: gsr eI 
- Sloka 5.—Kings have a single hair in a pore and 

scholars and vedic experts, two'in one. ‘Three and more 


"544 geeaiearara, =[Adh. LXVIII. Sl, 6-9, 


hairs in one make men penurious and miserable. In the 
-game manner are the hairs on the head auspicious and 
inauspicious as the case pmay be. 


fata aria Aaa atavaactidaddiin: | 


aiatiaia vata a usd aatter wey: 14 
Sloka 6.—A man with bony knecs-dies abroad: one 
with small ones, becomes fortunate ; one with large and 
ugly ones, indigent; one with sunken ones, vanquished 
by women; one with fleshy ones, ruler of a kingdom; 
and one with thick ones, long-lived. 
. ayseq qaAMATAT? : eqs gial aa- 
ae TWAT qardtied THISETYT gaary | 
alta faa eaaiseqaaal fas Arewaeaa 
VoMeayI Tal WRUSTET Wane thoi 
Sloka 7.—A man with a small penis becomes weal- 
thy, but without issue; one with a stout one, poor; with 
onc bent towards the left, devoid of children and wealth ; 
with one turned towards (bent) the right, blessed with 
sons; with one bent on the lower side, indigent; 
with one full of veins, begets few children ; with one with 
a thick knot, becomes happy; and with a soft cne, dies 
of gonorrhoea and the like. 
\ mS Oo aw? a AO 
Hataeyn saa Prawtelars | 
RGLIAHAl SA AUSAMA TTA tcl 
Sloka 8—Men with the genital organ hidden in 
sheath-like skin become kings ; with a long and split one, 
devoid of wealth ; and with a straight and round one as 
well as with one having slender veins, wealthy. 


wore fea: aiaae: ane fefra: 
APA AYN? ASAT. BATA 


Adh. LXVIII. SI. 10-14.] seafeaaissara: 545. 


SSS ae or coe chieneeneeenemenenenemecnemn nebneemmnemnenedieteneenereramnnartene tan nanan eee ET 


Sloka. 9.—A man with only one testicle finds a 
watery grave; with unequal ones, becomes addicted to 
concubinage ; with,equal ones, a king ; with ones raised 
high, short-lived; and with hanging (pendent) ones, 
lives for a hundred years. 

ia) LN c.. be AN 
THUG Ai alsgeats Wet als | 
giaa: aISTAA fara bt ASTANA '2oll 
efragaiata: aq a aT SATA: 
qeatigaa TU PMayara Taglar bik Vk 
wha ATR qsat BTAZE FT TTA | 
aaqrqaaqan ay PAU ATU TA ABT Rea 
alata asata: aeatatr wae Peary | 

X CA 

ASTYAA AIHA aAMeTeTy rag: 1123 

Stokas 10-13.—Men possessing a red end of the 
yvenerating organ become opulent; a whitish or dark 
one, penniless ; urinating noisily, happy ; without any 
sound, poor; with ‘two, three or four streams of urine 
turning in acircular fashion from lIcft to right, kings; 
with scattered urine, poverty-stricken; with a single 
stream turned tike a circle, blessed with fine features, 
but without issue ; with the tip glossy (tender), raised 
and even, enjoy wealth, women and gems; with the tip 
depressed in the middle, become fathers of girls and 
penurious; with one raised in the middle, owners of 
many domestic animals ; and with a stout one, devoid 
of money. 


In Sloka 12, 2nd 4%, Bavats#qazral is another reading, and 
the translation will then be “ blessed with’ handsome children.” 


ahesnahaaivarea gaara Rat | 


ganna aaa qeltien: Lei 
ta 69 


546 - geeitaraa (Adh, LXVITL. Sl. 15-19, 


wqaey _ MAITY TEITANG | 

aan: Visage ataarea Aeravait ue 

wdTey asa aaTNey TMG aie | 

ain agama aeigediseageng: 128 

Slokas 14-16,—Men with the upper part of the ab- 

domen dry withcut flesh are indigent and disliked by the 
people; with their semen having the smiell of flowers; 
become kings ; having the smell of honey, very opulent ; 
of fish, beget too many children; of flesh, become addicted 
to sensual pleasures; of liquor, sacrificers; of salt, 
utterly penniless; with thin semen, beget daughters ; 
those who have too frequent sexual congress (or those 
who have orgasm too soon ?), live long ; and those who 


have it very rarely (whose orgasm takes place very late ?) 
are short-lived. 


masiqatne anatase gated wale | 
SmAPaseT Reg REMATATA: Nol 
Sloka 17.—A man with very stout buttocks becomes 
poor ; with fleshy or muscular ones, happy ; with ones of 
one and a half the usual size (or with an extra half 
buttock), a killer of tigers; and with frog-like ones, a king. 
oe we fos ~ ~ ¢ ~ 
fagatdaaen: aiacanizaa: wim | 
AAAS WMATA FeAstiraiga fase: ure 
Sloka 18.—A man with a leonine waist becomes 
a king ; with one like that of a monkey or camel, is de- 
void of wealth ; with an even belly, enjoys pleasures ; 
and with a belly resembling a pot or a frying pan,’ be- 
comes penniless f 


ataaqal ata aaa ATTA | 
ANZA ALTA Prarfrataaaen: Tea 


Adh. LXVIII. Sl. 20.25.) weetvaatscara: 54/ 


saagan: tan: ster eqartat Avagar: | 
adiaa altar aaa qerhraga (Rott 


Slokas 19-20.—Those with fleshy sides become 
wealthy ; with sunken and crooked ones, are devoid of 
the pleasures of life; with an even stomach, enjoy the 
pleasures of life; with a sunken one are without happi- 
ness ; witha high one, become kings; with an uneven 
one, crafty ; with a serpentine (very long and thin) one, 
penniless and gluttonous. 


qhwesraaiaceaniag arate: ates: | 
AT VATA AG BaraN aay Neil 
afsacanat figar qarzatat awa Aer = I 
Me ANTM KUTA Tat aha ra: UR 
qraratal Fauqayreyat aaa: | 

rs me os ° ~ 
VATTROTH AT ATAATAAT FET 1231! 

Slokas 21-23.—People become happy by a navel 
that is round, raised and broad; afflicted with troubles 
by one that is small, almost invisible an | deep ; poor and 
die of colic (or wound from a spike) by one that is sur- 
rounded by folds of skin and uneven; rogues by one 
that is turned from right to left; intelligent by one that 
is turned from left to right; long-lived by one that is 
elongated at the sides; lords by one that is broad at the 


upper end ; owners of cattle, at the lower end ; and kings 
by one sat resembles the knob in the centre of a lotus. 


Tara aaiiaad gga TUATTT 
rake adiaaMiaaeard waiey URI 
IATSA AAA Vaca ATT TIT 
HYISU FAAT TERS welt 


4 


548 . geeattararg §=[Adh. LXVIII. Sl. 26-29, 


Slokas 24-25.--People with one, two, three, four or 
no folds at all on their belly becomein order slain with 
weapons, enjoyers of many women, preceptors of men, 
fathers of many sons, or kings; with unequal folds, sin- 
ners and addicted to forbidden women ; and with straight 
ones, happy and haters of (without taste for) others’ 
Wives. 


aiasagin: Ta: seoraaa aT: | 
faatiatgea: qaghtdlar TisA NN 
Sloka 26.—People with sides fleshy, tender and pos- 
sessed of hairy circles going from left to right become 
kings ; whereas those with sides of contrary characteris- 
tics are devoid of happiness and are slaves of others. 


COUT OURCCRE ETBCECIECEC (ALE 
daar: MraaaeyTTR aaa: Nill 
Sloka 27.—-People with not raised nipples become 


fortunate ; with unequal and long ones, penurious ; with 
stout, muscular and sunken ones, kings and happy. 
€c4 aGad TY A Ala AlAs F aIdary | 
aaatat ead aad ATS FMRI 
Sloka 28.—A heart that is raised, large, muscular 
and not convulsive, bespeaks kings ; one contrary to the 
above and full of veins and rough and thick hair, denotes 
the penurious. 
anTgqassaea: Nas WU Asay: | 
aad aval det a ean watraaa 183i 
Sloka 29,~-Those who have an even chest, become 
wealthy ; a muscular one, heroes ; a weak ‘one, penniless 
(or without manliness ?), and an unéven one, indigent 
and meet their end by weapons. ° 


Adh. LXVIII. SI. 30-34.] eeeréazitsvara: 549" 
ee 


Raaftamd aatreaPrelatsRaataaitag: | 
BHIATAM PaAaisaaty HA: 1301 
Stoka 30.—One who has undulating collar bones be- 
comes cruel; with many bony knots or joints, poor; 
raiscd ones, enjoys pleasures; sunken ones, poor; and 
stout ones, wealthy. 


Calqzdiat fa ase aia a awe ar war | 
Wisadlas Bl: TAWA TAMA 13211 
HTM UAL AVATHOS? TAIT waa | 

TB TAMA ATAMTA AYA TASHA 32" 

Slokas 31-32.—Orie is penniless with a neck flat ot 
dry (without flesh) and full of veins; heroic with one like 
that of a buffalo ; meets with one’s end by weapons with 
a neck similar to that of a bull; a king with one having 
three folds or lines ‘ a spend-thrift (glutton ?) with one 
hanging (long ?) One. Men become wealthy with their 
back, not split and without hair; and miserable with 
one of contrary characteristics. 


AACA AIGAITAATATSS BIT | 


fagrasay afiaradiseaqrafietarany Uli 
Sloka 383.—Men with arm-pits, not perspiring, 
plump, raised, good-smelling, even and hairy are to be 
known as wealthy ; otherwise, as penniless. 
Fania tata aaraedt @ Asaeaiar | 
Ageaegkaat aeel dreatiaaary lee 
. Sloka 84.—A poor man has shoulders full of hair, 
split, small and without flesh, while those who possess 


happiness and valout have shoulders, that are large un- 
split and compact. 


550 queifterara [Adh, LXVIIL. Sl. 35-40, 


STRERC COLE WICIRIGEGibe Gl aah tad | 
ang oediararaaarat teat ar R40 


Sloka 35,—Kings have arms that are like the trunks 
of elephants, round, hanging down to the knees, equal 
and plump; whereas the poor, hairy and short. 


caqT aaaguaasay Gamay | 


tearizat a qearAtrer: wanahararary 1128 tt 
qyatnaaetar aerate retrain: | 
BITTBT AAA STIMAATUTT Tat: iit 
Slokas 36-87.—Long-lived persons have long fingers; 
the fortunate, not bent ones (straight): the intelligent, 
lean ones; slaves, flat ones; the poor, very thick ones; 
those who are destined to die by weapons have fingers 
bent backwards. The wealthy have hands similar to 
those of monkeys ; and sinners, of tigers, 
nmarqaiaystes ghgearaayr: | 
nk 
didderssa: wa: aasey Fagear: RCI 
Sloka 38.—Wrists that are hidden, firm and of com- 
_pact joints make men kings ; deficient wrists indicate the 
cutting of hands; loose and sounding ones, poverty. 
. faites ela watta fata atasa at: | 
® ON CA ~ : 
TINA A Tas AMARA Sale? SII 
Ratiiea Mears ardetauea ware: | 
ar ~ ~ | - 
diaweaaqantantat ear sys volt 
Slokas 39-40.—Men with sunken palms are without 
patrimony; with palms containing circular depressions, 
rich ; with raised ones, philanthropists ; with unequal of 
uneven ones, cruel and poor; with those réd ‘like lac, 


Adb. LXVIII. SI. 41-46.] weaftaaitseara: 551. 


wealthy ; with yellowish ones, addicted to forbidden wo- 
men ; and with rough and dry ones, penniless. 
~ A aD ~~ 
qiaeaaan slahate: wieea aaa | 
e 2 
FAA: WASRA UAATTTT: UVM 
Sloka 41.—Impotént are those that have 'nails simi- 

lar to husk, 7. e , rough and containing many lines; im- 
poverished, that have flat and split ones; others’ depen- 
dents, that have dirty and colourless ones ; and com- 
manders of armies, that have red ones. 


ARTIUM! FTIASHAASAA Fat | 
aigigissain: Gam stages Wer 
os] 
Sloka 42.—Rich .are those that have the figure of 
barley-corn in the middle of their thumb; blessed with 
sons, when the figure is at the bottom of the thumb; 


and fortunate and long-lived, if the joints of the fingers 
be Jong. 


Raver fear tar sat area Arar | 
frayed fea vaaafrat qaqa: et 


Sloka 43.—The wealthy have glossy and deep lines 
on their palms; the poor, rough and not deep ones. 
The poor have their fingers far removed from one 
another ; and the hoarders of wealth, thick ones. 


wat tar aiacaaitaan Rasta sa: | 
diaguixanlhiga ara aaa nevi 
amar afaat fara a dlagesar: | 
PATTANT RTT AIATAT TIT UV4ll 
ROITTMSTT REMIT TTT | 
anteater:  @RaRSTTTY ues 


552 geeaigararg [Adh. LXVIII. Sl. 47-50, 


THAI ATA HAL H aAaAA Cals | 

Hilea AWA WAAGAAVIHT: Vy 

ARCATA AAT TATA: | 

agian Sahat aaadlta uv) 

aizagoraad gaa a Breit: | 

AFGYSTAL FAL WUH: FEAT: UV 

tan: maRnana: gargs Beriagat: | 

featagarad agtaniaat faa yet 

Slokas 44-50.—Three tines starting from the wrist 

and going towards the palm make one a king. One 
with a palm marke] with a pair of fishas performs sacti- 
fice diily (feeds the worthy) ; men with diamond-shaped 
figures, become wealthy ; with fish-tail figures, scholars ; 
with the figures of conch, umbrella, palanquin, elephant, 
horse and lotus, kings; with those of a pitcher, lotas- 
stalk, flag and goad, very rich with buried treasures; 
with rope-like ones, wealthy ; witb those of Swasthika, 
lords ; with those of a wheel, swords, axe, lance, spike, 
bow and Kunta (spear), commanders of armies; with 
those of mortar, sacrificers; with those‘ of a crocodile, 
banner and store-room, blessed with immence wealth; 
with an altar-like root of the thumb, worshippers of the 
sacred fire; with the figures of a quadrangular tank, 
temple and the like as of triangles, performers of religi- 
gious and meritorious acts. Conspicuous and slender 
lines at the root of the thumb respectively indicate sons 
and daughters. The lines (three) touching the fore-finger 
make one live for 100 years; and for shorter ones, pro- 
portionate reduction in age will have to be made. The 
lines cut inthe middle indicate a fall from tree. Those 


Adh. LXVIIL. Sl. $1-56.] wesfeastsvara: 553 


who have either too many lines or no lines at all on their 
palms become utterly indigent. 
aasaidtgatigen atasdarta: | 
PETTITT TAT AAT: 14 VII 
His: wPaaavsqsqaneass qwaatawi: | 
FAT FAST TAA TMEMTT: AAUIT Bars UA! 

Slokas 51-52.—Very lean and long chins indicate 
poverty ; while fleshy ones, wealth ; straight lower lips re- 
sembling the Bimba fruit make men kings; while lean 
(without flesh) ones, poor. The (upper) lips broken, cut, 
colourless and dry, make men devoid of money. The 
teeth being glossy and close-knit, and the canine ones 
very sharp and equal are auspicious. 

frgi THT stat Beet Baar @ aia Far | 
TA SO Ter Meat awe ay Uz 

Sloka 53.—Men that are destined to enjoy the plea- 
sures of Ilfe have the tongues and palate red, long, tender 
and quite even ; whereas the indigent have them, white 
or dark and rough. 

TST TET ATAAAS Vet aA ye yA | 
ata Sagat args TATE FT U4! 

Sloka 54.—The mouth being pleasant, round and 
clos€d, clean, soft and even, makes men kings; being 
contrary, those that are afflicted with troubles; anda 
very big mouth, makes one unfortunate (miserable). 


aiganavarat geatat wes atzaq | 

did Ageamt Alege WaRAiT: UX 

aaa qalat fea ag a aaactarany | 
PUNTA arg Aira Keay U4 


1. a. 70 


554 axtdigaraa [Adh. LXVIII. SI. 57-62. 


Slokas 55-56.—A feminine face belongs to the child- 
less ; a round one, to the roguish persons; a long one, 
to the poor ; a cowardly one, to sinners; a quadrilateral 
one, to the treacherous ; a sunken one, to the childless ; 
a very small one, to misers; and a full, fleshy and hand- 
some one, to those who enjoy pleasures. 


MPeay fad wy Wa AT Waa Va | 
Th TARE Tatars AFar yo 
Sloka 57.—The mustaches and beard being smooth, 
well-bent and soft, having unsplit ends, are of good au- 
gury ; being red, hard and short (sparse), produce thieves. 


fA: Has WaTMase: gagaran | 
HTN KART AFAMTIAYITTT: Weel 
TVR aeglgey saaitar Ages: | 
HU AUMAaSsNSeaAAS: Baa Ui 
Slokas 58-59,—Lean and lank ears lead to a treache- 
rous death ; flat ones, to enjoyment of many pleasures ; 
short ones, to miserliness ; conical ones, to command of 
an army ; hairy ones, to Jong life; large (broad) ones, to 
wealth ; those full of veins, to a cruel nature; fleshy and 
pendent ones, to happiness 
Hn ~ ral e 
wall alaeanoel weal aeqarataae a: | 
AAMT BRAVA A WHAT (1G ofl ° 
Bageraaranitar aaa gg Tavay | 
Melaaat ae Placq: anslacara: 11920 
afraSMABAA TATA TA: TAT! Bee | 
As ASST AFT ATA AAPA NARA 
Slokas 60-62.—Unsunken cheeks indicate enjoyment 
of pleasures; and full and plump ones, a minister. A 


Adh. LXVIII. Sl. 63 67.1 sea@esits<ara: 558: 


nose similar to a parrot’s beak gives happiness; a dry 
(without flesh) one, long life. One apparently cut, con- 
nection with forbidden women ; a long one, fortune; a 
curved one, stealing nature; a flat one, death at the 
hands of a woman; one crooked at the tip, wealth; one 
‘turned to the right, cruelty and improvidence; and a 
straight one with small nostrils and fine slopes, good 
fortune. 


avai ga asaicttated siz aaa a 
aigigat saw fat aed Fa Gail 
Sloka 63.—Sneezing once, twice or thrice, high- 
pitched and resonant is the sign of the wealthy; a pro- 
longed one as well as one of the same pitch throughout, 
of the long-lived. 


Others interpret it as:—Only once SneeZing is......... of the 
wealthy ; twice or thrice sucessively sneezing, high-pitched, re- 
sonant, etc.. of the long-lived. 


GUST aal GHaaarag: Brat ars | 
AZISATal AAMASTAd: ITT: NEV 
sRona wesw ara Saag: | 
AL BRUAAT ATTA BAA AT ITT s Ui 
way Wedaiaeqeancaaay gta: | 
* BlaHrararniaeniycdied wars 18! 
Wear WySeat Tara aaa alavaq | 
dia eearat fara Agertaazaq gl 
Slokas 64-67.—Men become wealthy with eyes re- 
sembling the petals of a lotus; wealthy and fortunate, 


with those that have fed corners; immensely rich with 
those coloured tawny like honey; sinners, with feline 


556: aeeGfrerarg [Adh. LXVIIL Sl. 68-72. 
eyes; thieves, with round and crooked ones resembling 
those of the gazelle; cruel, with blue ones ; commanders of 
armies, with elephantine ones ; wealthy, with deep ones ; 
scholars, with those having the lustre of blue lilies; The 
eyes that have very dark pupils will be pulled out; broad 
and thick eyes make ministers; green ones, fortune; 
humble ones belong to the poor; while glossy ones, to 
those who enjoy immense wealth and pleasures. 


aeaqahengn Agerataraaa: | 
faqaraal ata TeegaTAa: TAA IIRC 
igidaanaaa: woeiaghean | 
aeaqaarawa FF awl: Sisaneay (Geil 
Slokas 68-69.—Lofty brows are the indications of 
short life ; broad and lofty ones, of great happiness, un- 
equal ones, of poverty; bentones resembling the cres- 
cent, of wealth ; long and unconnected ones, of afflu- 
ence; cut ones, of indigence; and thuse bent in the 
middle, of addiction to forbidden women. 
saarTgs: agaraat fara: qadaeael: | 
ATASSTE aa aATTSGeYACIA lige J 
aaaasUrasay EC rqaTTATAT | 
SHATATATIA: ARIAT alerariag 198i 
Prasat qaaeqaTita: RUBAATA | 
AMPAAT A? HM: Js AITATSTeT: lho? lt 
Slokas 70-72,—By large and high temples, men _be- 
come wealthy; by sunken ones, devoid of children and 
money ; by an uneven forehead, men become indigent ; 
by one resembling the half-Moon' prosperous; by one 
large like a shell, preceptors of people; by one full of 


Adh. LXVIII, SL. 73-78-]  wesfeaaisvara: 557. 


ceil 


veins, addicted to unrighteous acts; by one filled with 
veins swollen as well as resembling the Swastika figure, 
opulent ; by a depressed one, suffer imprisonment and a 
foul death, as well as become addicted to cruel deeds; 
by a raised forehead, commanders of armies; by a round 
and small one, misers. 
vigaadiaaaa fara aT Yaa AASATIy | 
o ne ey - 
SI Wt WATT AT 7 BANT Jary 198i 
Sloka 73.—A weeping that is soft, without tears, 
and not humble, is auspicious to mankind; whereas one 
that is rough, humble and with copious tears is of evil 
consequences to them. 
alad Baqunry aiadiivasrad a WT | 
Gea araaaad AemeaaH_ Alea N9vll 
Sloka 74.—An unshaky laughter is of happy results ; 
ene accompanied by closed eyes belongs to a person that 
acts murderously ; a repeated one, to a wicked fellow; 
and a repetition at the end of one, to a madcap. 
Taal tar: Vaattat soreraan fear ale an | 
TIAA AC ATGFAT? ATMS [94 
ARsantameaanaayl aaacatay | 
HaeaAtaal vaeaifargig: 9k 
qataug: aqatarmramanradsy wes: | 
TEVAT VATS VeAIA THA: 1991} 
c~ (ks ~ 
PC PUEICCEUCEUCC TE CECILCE TCA 
MENT Bergeqahraeat BIZ 9c 
Slokas 75-78.—Three long lines on the forehead in- 
dicate a life of- hundred :years; four long ones, kingship 
and a life of 95 years; cut lines or no lines at all, addic- 


558 geeditarara (Adh. LXVILI. SI. 79-82. 


tion to forbidden women and a life of 90 years; the lines 
touching the hair on both sides, .a life of 80 years; five 
lines on {the forehead, indicate a life of 70 years; all 
lines converging to a point, of 60 years; many (six) 
lines, a life of 50 years ; crooked ones, of 40 years; 
those touching the brows, of 30 years; those curved to- 
wards the left, of 20 years; slender and small ones, a 
short life; those short of the above, a life that is to be 
proportionately calculated. 


qhavaaareriait: Buleaaian | 
Fade: Maaaa: HUeAeat Fare: (108 
aay aerapaiamae: UISSATTT 


fara g fat aeat aghzanade wag Ico! 

Slokas 79-80.—Men with a round head become rich 
in cattle; with one like an umbrella, kings; with a flat 
one, murderers of parents; with one like a cap or turban 
(lit. skull), long-lived; with a pot-like head, tourists; 
with a double head, sinners and indigent; with a de- 
pressed head, great men; and with a too-much depressed 
one, ill- aoge 


Ura: Rava: HORA ATS 

ght wage: Halt GAMRATETT aT lle VI 
TEqaaTAB TST TSCPeTTTT KATA | 
qagteranasaa qast Aaa lez 


Slokas 81-82.—One ,becomes a king or enjoyer of 
happiness, if the hairs (on the head) are single in each 
pore, gloséy, dark, bent, with tips unsplit, soft, and not too 
thick, One becomes penniless with the hair being many 
in one pore, of unequal length, browm very thick, with 
tips split, rough, short, too crooked and too dense. 


Adh. LXVIIE. Si. 83-88.] seaivadiseara: 559 


aaa a ataelt aaa 7 | 
race te Pavtara: ga aay e8t 
Sloka 88.—Whatever limb of the body is rough, 
without flesh, and full of veins, it is considered to be in- 
auspicious ; and the opposite of these is good. 
Are gal aevivesta waaaeet | 
n ¢ 
AAG Uhl Us Tag Say weay iicvit 
Sloka 84.—One becomes a king if one is broad in 
three limbs, deep in three, raised in six, short in four, red 
in seven, long in five and slender in five. 
art caus aealafa vat Teta aa aeeTy | 
BW sare aed a gat Paflotrag Rad ra uch 
aqaisy Fal aaalaara Haear ae waa | 
pais aant a ews flat a ae a analy Negi 
AAEAUTH (AMSAT GTS 
Th AMA VS Aq Qaraatia | 
AAT Wa TAA STa HAT 
WH AA BW a a ERaarany sel: 
CAVIAATEAAS Waaeaay Taaq | 
aft ciate @ wae a vaca grATATATT lcci! 
Slokas 85-88.—It is laudable for men to have (a) 
the three, viz., navel, voice and courage, deep; (6) the 
three, breast, forehead and mouth, broad; (c) the six, uv7z. 
chest, armpits, nails, nose, mouth and the nape of the 
neck, raised ; (d) the four,, viz., the genital Organ, back, 
peck and shanks, short; (e) it leads to happiness of men 


to have the seven, the corners of eyes, feet, hands, palate,. 
lower lip, tongue and nails, red, (f).the five, the teeth, 


560 gééfeartirg | [Adh. LXVIIL SI. 89-91. 


finger-kunckles, hair, skin and’ fingers, thin ;: and only 

kings have (g) the five, Hanu (the part below the chin), 

eyes, arms, nose and the space between the paps, long. 
IT. Completion. 


Sragaygunata aqaedi 
BSA ATSITIATVA SAN: | 
aaigia aes wWaaaaai 
aia eHizarerqcieaag eS 
Sloka 89-—The bodily lustre (complexion) which 
indicates both good and bad effects and reveals the 
virtues of the heart, as does the flame of a lamp kept 
inside a crystal pot, the qualities of brilliance, is to be 
observed by those well-versed in the science, in men, 
animals and birds. 7 
PAransacaTaTasMIsial BWieal Fe Aaygear | 
ALIISUATATAA BUA WHA aeeagia yA loi 
Sloka 90.—The lustre born of the element, earth, 
makes the teeth, skin, nails and hair on the body and 
head glossy, produces fine smell, bestows contentment, 
wealth, gain and rise in status, and causes engagement 
in religious and meritorious acts always. 
farar faresaitar awaari aera 
AMIVARAAAALATATT Hala | 
qaM Agata AaalT ACA 
Slat KS davat Braces |S 2il 
Sloka 91.— The lustre born of the element, water, 
is glossy, white or pure, green, attractive to the eyes, 
gives amiable qualities,a soft nature, happiness, pros~ 
perity, all kinds of progress like a mother, and all-round 
good to human beings. 


Adh. LXVIIL. Si. 92.04.) aaeftadtscara: 561 


SSrgeq TaLANAAN Jw AMAA: ATA: | 
adie afhat aaa fat ats abate <a it 


Sloka 92.—The lustre born of the element, Fire, 
is irascible, irresistible, of the hue of lotus, gold or fire, 
endowed with brilliance, valour and might, leads to 
victory of beings and confers immediate accomplishment 
of the desired object. 


MSATSIH TA WITH TSAI 

aay TaAISTETTT VATA | 
CHIERATIST ATITMYSIT 

faa aaateat Raat aesaqt 119 3K1 


| -Sloka 93.—The lustre born of the element, air, is 
dusky, rough, dark, of foul smell, and leads to murders, 
imprisonment, diseases, disasters and loss of wealth. 
The lustre born of the element, ether, is of crystal hue, 
a bestower of fortune, very generous, very clean anda 
treasure, as it were, of all good things, 


SM RAY HAaVeaAaeqTeyl: 
afagatea 2a aa aqaqeal | 

AA SAAATSTATAS TAA 
GEAR SANK aaa: AVI 


Sloka 94,.—These are the five kinds of bodily lustre 
.born, in order, of earth, water, fire, air, and ether; 
but according to others, there are five more, which are 
in order, born of the Sun, Vishnu, Indra, Yamia and _ the 
Moon. Since the latter five are -similar to the others in 
characteristics and effects, the five mentioned above have 


been given as containing the whole matter, 
$97) 


562 geeaivarara (Adh. XVIII. Si. 95-99. 


Ill. Voice. 
eftanedl aiiaee erative TT | 
TERAATETAUA ATATSATTTASE’ Sal 


Sloka 95.—Kings have a voice similar to the sound 
of elephants, bulls, a group of chariots, drums, tabors, 
lions or clouds. Those that are devoid of wealth and 
happiness, have a voice which is broken, rough or like 
that of a donkey. 

IV: Strength. 
aq vated & are ATAMTeaT er 
Vat ata Ble ant TAMAS SEI 


Sloka 96.—Living beings have seven vital substances 
in their body, viz., fat, marrow, skin, bones, semen, 
blood and flesh. The following are their effects in brief : 


MANGAS aR aAKTAUgHTITA: | 
wh FT THAR TgaTATgagA: loll 
Sloka 97,—If there be blood-red colour in the palate, 
lips, jaws, tongue, corners of eyes, anus, hands and feet, 
men would have the vital substance of blood in abun- 


dance, and be endowed with all kinds of happiness, 
wealth and many wives and children. 


Raracaag sitar agin gaat Aagoriagy: | 
AMAA TI FNtaga uci 
Sloka 98.—The wealthy have a glossy skin; amiable 
ones, a soft one; scholars, a thin one; the handsome and 
those that are blessed with sons and wealth, fat and mar. 
- row in plenty. 


 equimdwant wary Reaea: qea4 
TETSYAT Tam fiatar Svdeqs sit 


Adh. LXVIII. SI]. 100-103.] area®aatseara: 563 


Sloka 99.—One who has thick bones is termed 
‘ bone-strong’ and has physical strength, good features 
and sound learning. Fortunate, learned and handsom2 
are those that have copious and thick semen. 


V. Jornts. 
safyaeal Ray aat gear aaa a | 
USM sa FT Qlseaieadl BATA Hal ool 


Sloka 100.—One who has a well-developed body 
is termed ‘ Flesh-strong’, and possesses learning, wealth 
and handsome features. Those who have compact joints 
are said to have ‘ cohesion’ and they enjoy happiness. 


VI. Gloss. 
BE IMG SEA aageeaawaaza: | 
qraadaraga: aryaaa SH NOR 
Sloka 101.—Gloss is to be observed in five things, 
viz., speech, tongue, teeth, eyes and nails. If all these 


are glossy, men will be blessed with sons, money and 
fortune ; whereas if these are rough, they will be poor. 


VIT. Colour, 


gfrary kaa: iva asa: gadazary | 
Sat aadlarat Ja: Daal 7 age: Voz 
"Sloka 102.—A glossy and shining complexion be- 
longs to kings; a medium one, to those with sons and 
wealth ; a rough one, to the indigent; a clean comple- 
xion is always good; and not so, a mixed one. 


_ VIII. Physiognomy. 


Aas THURITIATH ATTA Ar | 
qafrcararn Rrattaal array 208i 


564 geeigaram [Adh. LXVII[. S]. 104-107 


AAAI AIIITAT AATTAATA: | 
NARNIA WA VATE Nov 
Slokas 103-104.—The previous birth is to be de- 

duced from the face ; those whose face resembles that of 
a cow, bull, tiger, lion or eagle, had a good pre-natal ex- 
istence and had become great kings of irresistible valour, 
vanquishing their foes. The previous birth of those who 
had their face similar to that of a monkey, buffalo, boar 
or goat, had a moderate previous birth, and will enjoy 
in this birth wealth, happiness and learning. Those 
whose face and body are like those of a donkey or a 
camel, will have neither wealth nor happiness. Their 
previous birth was very bad. 


IX. Height. 
Asad voTa: TAT Aqualilaria garg | 
SAMA ATAIA HSA TA WAT N2okll 
Sloka 105.—The height of the best type of men is 


108 digits of themselves, that of the medium type, 96 
digits, and that of the inferior one, 84 digits. 


X, Weight. | 
AGA? GAME Gadisa Teaavqaeyas | 
ASA ATIATATASASS ATA TA 112081] 


Sleka 106.—A person weighing half a Bhara (1000 
palas) will be happy; one weighing less than that, mise- 
rable; those weighing one Bhara, immensely wealthy ; 
and one weighing one Bhara and a half, an emperor. 


ata ad ger: we walsatainese: | 
ag aatiend Sitaart agd at zoo 


« 


Adh. LXVIII. Sl. 108-114.] ateafeaatseara: 565 


Sloka 107.—A woman of 20 years and a man of 25 
years deserve to be weighed and their height measured ; 
or this may be done soon after they pass a fourth part of 
their span of life. 


Here the span of life is taken to be 100 years. Otherwise, 
weight and height should be taken when they pass a fourth part 
of their life. 


XI. Natural Character 
PABASA Sea gay 1TATITB TET | 
atta vale Jer saNdaRala INT Loci 
Sloka 108.—The nature of men resembles that of 
earth, water, fire, air, ether, gods, mortals, demons, 
devils or beasts, The following are their characteristics ; 
neta: Bayaaeg acuinary gaan: fur | 
araaan teaaral Beahraet wrarsey 1% 08H 
Sloka 109.---A man of earthy nature has the smell 
of good flowers, enjoys pleasures, has a pleasant breath, 
and is firm mentally. One of watery nature drinks plenty 
of water, speaks agreeably and enjoys delicious things. 
' In the last 0.4, taatsaa is another reading. 


afaapen aqaistadiemae: qagiguaay | 
aah: aaa AS? HIT (YA a Hives Ta Waa Lot 


Sloka 110.—A man of fiery disposition is fickle- 
minded, very cruel, irascible, ever hungry and glutton- 
ous. One of airy nature is unsteady in character, lean 
(weak) physically, and easily loses temper. | 


anstatagat fagata: DOTA: HAS! Slay: | 
"+ TUTTE TUG MIT: Tigray MATTE (288 


566 geedftaara (Adh, LXVIII. Sl. 112-115. 


Sloka 111,—A man of the nature of ether js clever, 
open-mouthed, expert in grammar, and _ possessed of 
limbs with beautiful veins. A man,of divine nature is 
charitable, of soft temper, and devoted to friends. 

aMaTTaga Manze: I 
arama aaa aaa: eek 

Sloka 112.—A man endowed with a human nature 
is fond of songs and ornaments, always possesses a good 
character and shares his wealth with his fellowmen. 
denna: aaasaa wey aaa frgraqony | 
arsqacaaisl AsimAl ATIAsah a ager: 12 


Sloka 113A man of a demoniac nature is hot- 
tempered, of wicked actions, and sinful. One of a devi- 
lish nature is fickle-minded, uncleanly, given to prattling 
and of a corpulent physique. 


ate GUSIETR FT ass acta aehaeany | 

aq ane aHlas Weer agang sacha aes evil 
Sloka 114,—A man of bestial nature is timid, ever- 

hungry and gluttonous. Thus has been expounded the 


nature of men which the knowers of characteristics call 
‘ Sattva '—inner mettle. 


XTT. Gast. 
anecaaneiaranrdlat 
gen aatea aft: frat a aa: | 
tat a weqiied fata a ata 
asta gaaeyaar TT ALAM 


- Bloka 115.—The gait of kings resemble that of lions, 
swans, intoxicated elephants, bulls or peacocks; that of 


EXVILL. 116, LXIK.1-2 | qeaanitadtscara: 567 


a“ 


the rich is slow and without any sound; and that of the 
poor, brisk and leaping. | 
In the first 1% algeluz is another reading- 
Weaaq wWwryd 4 gwladas 
Cat TUNA AAG Tat | 
Tala TA FoI aafed Ble 
wa acted GS TA AANA 12 eel 
Sloka 116.—Those learned in the science of human 
characteristics call a man blest, if he gets the following 
facilities in time, viz, a conveyance, when fatigued ; 


food, when hungry ; drink, when thirsty:; and protection, 
when frightened. 


Thus ends the 68th Adhyaya on ‘ the Signs of Men.” 


GAAIVISANT 118i! Signs of the Five Great Men, 


aWetaye: AAT aawaal: | 
SE TSU TTA Tass aWas TEA 21 
Sloka 1.—When the non-luminous planets are strong, 


posited in their own or exaltation signsand in Kendra 


houses, five great personages are born. I shall now 
describe them. 


* ofa vata ga: ait aa: gaa VaR | 
my ‘ 
ag Aa afeat aweal TaqsA lle! 

Sloka 2.—When Jupiter, Saturn, Mars, Mercury 
and Venus are in their turn strong, great men. called 
Hamsa, Sasa, Ruchaka, Bhadra and Malavya respectively 
are produced. ° 

, Cf. arraet Adh. 37-Sk 2. 


\ 


568 geaftaraia (Adb. LXIX. $1. 3-6. 


aaqdld Gasenlt aad FT AeA | 
TAAAMAA AIM: A FATT Ril 
AAIAATT ATH laa aM aTaS I: | 
WABtAeTTaas AFA SAMs Gey v9 
Slokas 8-4.—A person’s undiminished mettle is de- 
rived from the Sun (when strong); physical and mental 
qualities (strength) from the strength of the Moon. A 
person’s characteristics depend upon the Rasis and their 
various divisions in which these two planets are posited 
(as well as upon the planets with which they are conjoined). 
Men will be blessed with the bodily substance, great ele- 
ment, nature, lustre, colour, mettle, appearance, etc., be- 
longing to the particular division of a sign occupied by 
them (when strong); when these two are weak, the 
characteristics will be of a mixed type. 
Cf. sre Adh. 37-28, . 
MARAT JBI FAGAN AE aq wes | 
aml: Maga TNA: AreTaTgeaT Wl 
Sloka 5—From Mars do they get valour; from 
Mercury, physical growth and weight; from Jupiter, 
voice ; from Venus, cleanliness or glossiness; and from 
Saturn, colour or complexion. Owing tothe excellences 
or defects of these planets, the above things become 
good or bad as the case may be. 
Cf. arraei Adh. 37-3. 


agin: ea ga zag ast aaa gaata | 
Rogeatsiaeqaaeaaatiaadan: 18 
Stoka 6.—Men with mixed characteristics do not 


become kings, but they become happy in the Dasa 
periods of the planets concerned, The differences arise 


Adh. LXIX. Sl. 7.9.] ustaananiseara: 569 


b saeetanneliataaed 


from the benefics being posited in the house of their 
enemy, or depression, or being fallen from their exalta- 
tion sign, or from their being aspected by malefics (or 
from the benefics boing aspected by planets, benefics or 
malefics, being posited in the houses of their enemy, 
depression or having fallen from their exaltation house). 


WHMIS Saratal Ala | sae | 
TAISARARM SIA STM SAFSAETL (lI 


Slokt '.—The height and extent of the two arms 
outstretched of the Hamsa type of men are 96 digits ; 
and those of Sasa, Ruchaka, Bhalra and Malavya are 
99, 102, 105 and 103 divits respectively. 


a: alana cat Paced away saree 
WUSTRS BETES HAIaaAawH AT Fetslawes ici 


. ee, 


aaa: Tatra Wat Taissa: Braqaslaraz: | 
AACA = - A ce ba = 
THATS ATACARA AAA Ae A Aq Aa WA? UII 
Slokas 8-9.—A person i1 whom the quality of 
goodness predoininates hus kindness, firmness, courage 
Straightforwardness and devotion to Brahmins and Gods; 
one in whom the quality of passion predominates, ts 
heartily attached to literature (poctry), fine arts, sacri- 
fices and women, and is very heroic ; and one in whom 
the quality of darkness or ignorance predominates is de- 
ceitful, foolish, lazy, hot-tempered and addicted to sleep. 
There are persons with mixed characteristics owing tou 
the intermingling of these three qualities in seven ways. 


WSsEAl AMAA AAUAIWS AAAEA TAT 
rT ~~ C 
ata: yoimaral qASRAgaeTAt Baa | 
ae 72 


$46 qeedi@arara [Adh. LXIX. SI. i0-14. 


A ON 8 . cS ~ ~ ? Cas 
qaet Berard staat aged q fad- 

valarea aeHTS antag afaniaraiga il? ol 

Sloka 10.—A man belonging to the Malavya type 

has his arms resembling the trunk of an elephant and 

touching the knees, the limbs and joints full of flesh, the 

body even, handsome and slender in the waist, the face 

13 digits in height, the ear-holes 10 digits apart, shining 

eyes, fine cheeks, equal and white teeth and not a very 
fleshy lower lip. 


WSU A UVRSAUT lelaegiawarsdig | 
mAisaatisad ust Nitaatieary Haq’: |? 2 
Sloka 11.—One belonging to the above class be- 
comes a king of cultured mind, and rules over the Mal- 
was, Broach, Surastrians, ane Sindhus and the regions 
of the Pariyatra mountain, having amassed wealth by 
dint of prowess. 
aMaaa Assase Meaa acaqainiaid | 
SANAAATTTA TH AWA Bay TEA Ul 
Sloka 12.—Such a person (Malavya) lives for 70 
years and abandons his body in a sacred place by Yoga. 
Thus have the characteristics of this class been clearly 
explained and those of the other classes I now proceed 


to define, 
Cf. aitlae%t Adh, 37-29, 30. 


SaaaaATAataageAMaAaa: agesalsE | 
BeAg IATA gs Aaa A: @B Bata az lai 
Sloka 13.—One belonging to the Bhadra class has 


the following characteristics :—His arms are well-deve- 
loped, equal, round and long ; his height is equal to-the 


Adh. LXIX. SI. 14-17.] varaaqiaaatseara: 571 


edueateinentinaammendeates sadam ieecemmcamtaettl 


length of his outstretched arms; and his temples are 
densely covered with tender and slender hair. 


ASTRA Tata aca sage: Paws | 
Co ¢ ee a 
AAT TAIT! HAT MA TAAL TEATAIAT | 2 vil 
MIT ASH Gwazag: zaratygr waar qger: | 
atiannaamiaag at gaa: aadeaat 124 
Slokas I14-15.—His skin and semen are strong ; 
breast large and inuscular ; nature, lofty ; face, tiger-like; 
mind, steady ; he is endowel with tolerance; attached 
to righteous deeds; evrateful; his gait is like that of a 
lordly elephant ; he knows many sciences ; is intelligent ; 
handsome ; has beautiful temples and forchead ; is well- 
versed in fine arts; is courayeous; has a good belly ; 
his feet and hands have the lustre of the interior of lotus; 
he loves contemplation; he has a good nose and equal 
and well-knit brows. 


ATF ABMATAPFE AS IeTz TAT SITIM ETAT | 
BRAD CRORIETE Cities GIDILCU CUM EAT] 


Sloka 16.—His person smells like the earth sprinkled 
with fresh rain, cassia leaf, saffron, ichor of elephants, 
and Aguru (tree) ; his hairs are dark, curly and single in 
each pore ; and his genital organ is hidden like that of a 
horse or elephant. 
CIYASNAMMAIFARSTABUSAANS NSA: | 
faaratt aaise agsiia gait & a aad aaeralgs 

Sloka 17,—His hands and feet are marked with the- 
figures of ploughs, staves, maces, swords, conch-shells, 
wheels (discuses), elephants, crocodiles, lotuses and cha- 
riots. His wealth is fully enjoyed by the public. He 


572 secttgarary {Adh. LXIX. ‘Si. 18-20. 


Ce a es secatnemnameshtetdetbiaminlitnneemmramaanennnnemmeel 


has independent ideas and does not tolerate his kith 
and kin. 


ARB BEIGE: TRA TGAT ASANT fs are 
weeps eaale Gees AIS ABBA TITS UCU 


— Sicka 18.— His height and weight are respectively 
84 digits and a Bhara (2000 palas). He becomes the 
king of the central countries; but if his height and ex- 
tent of outstretched arms be each 105 digits, he would be 
an emperor. 


FAT Braga Wangiisagreasz: | 
aia aimnitingeat azi Fars aif ues 
Sloka 19.—The Bhadra type of man rules fittingly 
for 80 years over the earth conquered by valour, and 
abandoning his mortal coil in a place of pilgrimage goes 
to heaven. 


aloaai Adh, 37-40, 44, 42, 43. 


SEMA MA sia: RAAT: Aaa 
Rarnaatatrarg fra aeqaa|e: ass | 
aaa: Manga: waaeiantaaaa: 
Wl Aaea WarasAgigTY AM! WA Roll 
Sloka 20.—One belonging to the wa (Sasa) group 
has somewhat prominent and thin teeth, thin nails, large 
eye-balls, brisk gait, attachment to learning, minerals and 
trade, has plump cheeks, and roguery; he is a com- 
mander of armies; fond of sexual pleasure; his mind 
is addicted to others’ wives; he is fickle-minded, heroic, 
devoted: to his mother and a lover of forests, mountains, 
rivers and fortresses. 


Adh. LXIX. Sl. 21-21.) gattaataaaiseara: 573 


aigqisgarat garaged ASA: WET | 


AISA AAl MATa: TAT Tat aATS wees WAVW1 

Sloka 21.—Ilis height is 92 digits ; he acts cautiously 
(or with apprehension), knows the weakness of others, 
has marrow as the dominant feature of his body, walks 
steadily and such a wat is not very corpulent (heavy ?). 


HEY HR UTHAFIMNTATASAaAgEI: | 
OTT TTA Tal ATA TATA BL IT UR 
Sloka 22.—He has a slender waist and figures go- 
ing upwards of a shield, sword, lute, cot, garland, tabor 
and trident on the soles or palms. 
aera mIvElerRISAT 1a Renerameiaaighe: | 
Od WA AAlaaaaqiss ATAIA SATIVA [12li 
Sloka 23.—This person of the wa class is the lord 
of foresters or a vassal; his body will be afflicted with 
colic or a fistuia on the mattoules and will go to Yama’s 
abode at the age of 70 years. 
Cf. aitiaet Adh. 37—34, 35, 36. 


Th WaARTeATad TA Ba 
qt ae isa ayaa aa a cH Aa | 
SAME TTF AAG TSR AT ETAT GS. 
MetanetTa: TIT gaz WAARTT Nell 


Sloka 24,—A person belonging to the €& (Hamsa) 
class has a face that is red, with plump cheeks, raised nose 
and a golden hue ; ; his heat is round; eyes are like 
honey; all nails red has the marks of a garland, goad, 
conch, a pair of fish, sacrificial appurtenance, pot and 


574 geeargararg [Adh. LXIX. Sl. 25-28. 


lotus. His voice is assweet as that of a swan, feet 
handsome, and limbs (organs of action) clean. 
waeala AMAIA fem aead! resfuias | 


~ AS 


qitainyya qega ayia: arqitaifaar Ta: uel 


Sloka 25.~-He takes pleasure in (sporting in) water ; 
his semen is thick and copious; his weight is 1600 
palas. The wise declare that his height and extent are 
96 digits each. 
WAH EU VAMAAY WeTWMHPagareaay | 
TI Tala Wat ed Heal sated AAAs wegq zit 

Sloka 26.—A man of the Hamsa class rules over 
the Khasas, Surasenas, Gandharas and the countries 
lying between the Ganges and the Jumna. He wields 
sceptre for 90 years and meets his end in a forest. 

Cf. atuaaét Adh. 37—37, 38, 39- 

GAKTl THIN? HAMA saqraiqiar | 
Us HU AB aeal Biearal sarara} | uit 

Sloka 27.—A man of the #a% Ruchaka type has 
beautiful brows and hair, is dark and red in colour; has 
a conch-like neck, and an oblong face. Jide is heroic: 
cruel, a leader among men, a minister, leader of a gang 
of thieves and hardy. , 
UEMAMAS SARA TI ALIA ATTA aT | 
ageeh: aitrantaadt eat feat geahear: uu 

Sloka 28.—The girth of the waist of a man of the 
eas (Ruchaka) class is equal to the length of the face, 
His complexion is good, and blood and flesl:, of the best 
quality. He destroys his enemies and ‘achieves his object 
by adventurous spirit. 


Adh. LXIX. SI. 29-32.) wataanfaanlscara: 848 


VI HAUMATAUAAIB RAS SIIMT TU: | 
WH TOMAIATAal TaFS Bl TAATA: 12a 4) 


Sloka 29.—His fect and palms are marked with the 
figures of a part of cot, lute, bull, bow, diamond, spear 
(sakti), Indra, and trident. He is devoted to elders, 
Brahmins andGods. His height and weight are res- 
pectively 100 digits and 1000 palas. 

WALMATFAIS? HFITATST 

faeey qaatiigaiadi @ wae | 
AFT ARAAA! GAR ALE 

TAN MAFIA AAUMAGA Io! 

Sloka 30.-—He will be clever inspells and black 
magic ; and his knees and shanks lean. A man of this 
class, viz., 84% becomes king and rules over the re- 
gions of the Vindhya, the Sahya and Ujjain. He dies 
at the age of 70 years by weapon or fire. - 

Cf. ara} Adh. 37—31, 32, 33, 


Nl SUPA SANTK I 
Gat TAA AIA’ HsalsqT WeaFisg arat | 
Ginyagau wae aginass: sey wai 321 
Sloka 3l.-—There are five other men, who will be 
thesattendants of the monarchs mentioned above, viz., 
Vamanaka, Jaghanya, Kubja, Mandalaka and Sachi. 


Now, listen to the characteristics of these that are known 
as the “ mixed ones.” 


aral is another reading for arat. 
4 


APR TAT MATE: Rated eReTeaTg | 
SUA gt AT ATigwial Talal Us Taz ww: 4 


516 7 _ Sedigarary [Adh. LXIX. Sl, 33-36, 


Witte ieee eR a aN ree an ne Pet eee teen eee 


Sloka 82 —Vamanaka is of full grown limbs hunch- 
backed, and slightly undeveloped in the thighs, waist 
and between the armpits. He is: famous servant of the 
king of the Bhadra type. Ue is prosperous, powerful 
and devoted to Lord Vasudeva. 


WSseqaal FT AIAAR B~UVesqeasqag: gaiea: | 
TaN AT AA KIA SISA: CPSRUFeT AV 
BU Fal VSAa: TAMA SGA CATA AT: | 
SUSSATATAUINAUS: F AT TATAT Uv 


Slokas 38-84,.—The one called Jaghanya isa ser- 
vant of Malavya; his cars are like the crescent; joints, 
good; semen, thick; he is a tale-bearer and a poet. 
His complexion is rough and fingers, thick. He is cruel, 
wealthy, unintelligent, well-known, copper-coloured, of 
jocular disposition and is marked with the figures of a 
sword, Sakti, noose and axe in the thighs, feet and hands. 


HEA AA I A UP Tag aio: MATA aa | 
galaal aeanisaeral fata Aw avg: MeHAT 1134 
Boelaa: Roiag Tyas: Waa | 

AGST Bit AACARATHE ASTGH AAAI 1134 | 


Slokas 35-86.—The one called Kubja has no defect 
in the lower limbs. - He is slightly weak and bent in the 
upper part of the body. He is an attendant of Hamsa, 
an athiest, wealthy, Icarned, hervic, grateful and a tale- 
bearer. He is learned in fine arts, fond of quarrel, has 
many servants, is conqucred by women. He honours the 
people and suddenly abandons them.» He is ever ener- 
getice . | 


Adh, LXEX: Sl. 37-40.) qatrragitaatscare: S77 


PWRSHOANAT SIRTAATIMA SAS: | 
PUA; Sig arg sara: lll! 
c 
FAIA BUISIYIN WaATs FIs | 
fextaaqiiasameal: atiaat afaarg ili 
Slokas 87-38.—Now, I shall define the Mandalaka : 
He is an attendant of *a%, expert in black magic, clever, 
adept in witchcraft, creating magical women and ghosts, 
and in lores. Heappears old; hishairsare rough and 
hard ; heis clever in killing his enemies; he is devoted 


to Brahmins, Gods, sacrifices, and Yoga (Meditation) ; 
is defeated by women and is intelligent. 


ardia a: aistatreate: Targa az ang | 

Qa MEAT HT TNS ATAT WITq ARIA? 123i 
Sloka 39.—One that is called atfaq (Sachin) has a 

very ugly and deformed body; he is a follower of wa, 

is disliked by people (or unfortunate) ; he is charitably dis- 


posed. He undertakes great tasksand achieves them. 
He is similar to Wt in qualities. 


alata is another reading for ariia. 
GeISANgwias Aa gitaatia faved aaa: | 
sea atl TWarAa Aas GsaA | TWA |'Vol 

* Sloka 40.—Thus have I explained briefly the cha- 
racteristics of men, after studying the opinions of the 


Sages. By studying this, a man will become the favou- 
rite of kings and a beloved of the ‘people. 


Thus ends the 69th Adhyaya on the “ Five kinds of Great Men.” 


Tq 78 


578 qeedigaram = (Adh. LXX. Sl. 1-3. 


Srqieany |iSellCharacteristics of Maidens. 
RavarqaAaAAaS FAI? 
hal matt 
Tet aaa aTVyeTER | 
Pasyel saved! 4 FAT- 
maigzerie yastyatacaassy 2 il 
Sloka 1.—One who wishes to become the lord of 
the earth must marry a maiden, the nails of whose feet 
are glossy, arched, pointed at the tip, and red, the ankle- 
joints, equal, well-developed (fleshy), handsome and 


hidden ; the toes, close-touching, and the soles as lustrous 
as a lotus. 


AUF MT ATTTA ESA 


x A a 5. 
AACA TWAS VAT AAT | 
ae a Uatiea faa az 
MILA AHATATA qT TT NR 
Te Tal Btarafsaraear- 
TAMIA YS + Tay | 
“~ c e 
AUsseas RAAT F 
Wel ang Aget Braqeaia U3 
Slokas 2-3.—Commendable are the feet with tender, 
unsweating soles and with the marks of fish, goad, lotus, 
barely, diamond, plough and sword. So also are the 
shanks that are perfectly round and without hair and 
veins. The two knees, being equal and without very 
prominent joints, are good. The thighs, being plump, 


without hair and similar to the truuks of elephants, the 
genital organ being broad and similar to the leaf of.the 


Adh. LXX. SI. 4-7.] aartaaatseara: 579 


Aswattha tree, the top of the thighs being large and 
arched like the back of a tortoise, and the Mani (clitoris?) 
being hidden—all these tend to great prosperity. 
faadiorataratad tard: yer ae TIATROTT | 
aiaaia Ageia waa aT AAT Nl! 
Sloka 4.—The .hips being large, heavy and fleshy, 
support girdles (and are auspicious); the navel, being 


deep, broad, and turned from left to right, is laudable in 
women. 


aeq faangaeaaaagt 4 
TM FAAATA Hisavgvat | 
TaTaaag AE aRaAat 
Hint a arghayasgara ca sll 
Sloka 5,—The waist of a woman being accompa- 
nied by three folds and without hair; the bosoms hard, 
overlapping, round and equal ; the breast, tender and 


without hair; and the neck adorned with three lines— 
all these, bestow wealth. and happiness. 


TyMI*gatasal ataar wawterTEqyg | 
eeqgsaiaan: aar fast atta sagentratan ei 
Stoka 6.—The lower lip being similar to the Bandhu- 
jeeva flower, fleshy and shaped like a ripe beautiful Bim- 
ba'fruit, and the teeth alike and similar to the Kunda 


buds, bestow marital happiness and abundant wealth on 
women. 


aiqoqgmaas Wwysea- 
Tay WaRaAdanaetatweay | 
aa Tal Ager |Vlaee saeA 
THSACATS TATA F isi 


586° | —— geeéfterara, “(Adh. LXX. SI. 8-10. 


“evra ennui Aa TASS CPt ere fran «rc ont teres. pe eneeeseniateesinipsotanrsteneeerancemesnenetnanes cena 


Sloka 7.—Their speech being full of courtesy, free 
from roguery, sweet like the notes of the cuckoo or the 
swan, and not abject, women get very great happiness. 
Auspicious is the nose that is straight, handsome and 
having equal slopes. So also is the eye that defeats the 
lustre of the petal of a blue lily. 


att aye aia wy A GA TA WA WMSITEAM | 


HHCAMAAUAT FA SBE A AT A THY cll 
Sloka 8.—Blessed are the brows that are not actu- 
ally joined together, not very broad (thick), not very long, 
and curved (arched) like the crescent. So is the fore- 


head that is neither sunken, nor arched, without hair, 
and shaped like the half Moon. 


sealgoa qantas Tas az awe TAA | 
faradiawgetaam qa gan: am Ae 18 
Sloka 9.—Laudable are the ears that are properly 
fleshy, soft, equal and close to the head. The hair being 
glossy, blue, soft, curled and single in each pore, lead to 
happiness. So does the head which is even, 7. 6, neither 
depressed, nor raised. 


TRMAATAETTIATITTT 
MAGCSMAUTFTAT USAT TTT: | 


AAA RU ReITAH: USAT Ts: 

qie WNsassyal Waal Wesiea TAVITA 12 oll 

Sloka 10.—Damsels that have the marks of the 
following things on their soles or palms attain to the 
status of queens, v2z., water-pot, seat, horse, elephant, 
chariot, Bilwa tree, sacrificial post, arrow, garland, ear- 
‘ring, chowry, goad, barley corn, mountain,. banner, 


Adh. LXX. $l. 11-13.) aafwesiscara: 581 


arch, fish, Swastika, altar, fan, conch shell, umbrella 
and lotus. 


Payeataragt aeTTT TATA 
atl TaaaaaIwseewsEsl | 
a fraaia ated aras ataniead 
maa FT qagardasairay 12 21 
Sloka 11.—The hands that have the wrist-joints 
hidden, are similar to the interior of a full-blown lotus, 
have the fingers slender and the knuckles far removed, 
give a damsel the status of a queen. A lady whose palm 
is neither depressed, nor raised, and bears fine lines (fi- 
gures of auspicious objects) lives with her husband for a 
long time enjoying wealth and the happiness of sons. 


asaKis at altaeqaiegr tar war qilttasssaran: | 
Tea ea TASSAT AT GAISAAT VSIA AT ANT AU 


Sloka 12.—A line on the palm rising from the wrist 
and touching the middle finger of a woman, or one run- 
ning from the heel up to the foot of the toes of a man 
leads them to the happiness of kingship. 


Another interpretation: A line rising............ffrom wrist or 
one from heel.e.cesee of a man or woman. 
e 


aMRqora Ta a ahralertareaTy | 
HUA VAT WATT AT TAMA | ATAATT: 23M 
Sloka 13.—A line rising from the foot of the little 
finger and going to the space between the fore and mid- 
dle fingers bestows theemaximum span of life, ¢. e,, 120 
years, If the line is shorter, proportionate reduction in 
the span will havesto be made. | | 


582 ' ggeatgarara [Adh LXX. Sl. 14-18. 


AFEYS ATTA TA GAT TEA? TAT Teg: | 


ARSAAeA TAI: Berge SAS_rArs UueVvil 

Sloka 14.—The lines at the, foot of the thumb indi- 
cate the number of one’s children. Big ones are those 
of sons, whereas slender ones, of daughters. If these 
lines are not cut in the middle (at the root), the children 
will be long-lived; and if these are broken and short, 
they are short-lived. 

In the 3rd 912, SiSaqe! is another reading. 
digas BARAT fATaatasgwRy | 
RATsheneia wa AMATAIATR TINA 14 

Sloka 15.—Thus have the auspicious features of 
damsels been described; those contrary to the above are 
said to be inauspicious. [ shall now briefly enunciate the 
features that are especially of harmful effects. 


BAGH A AaAraAT Al Hel aA As Vaid fa@at: Ag | 
NAAAUSEAAS Bar eat al Faetsfagqray 240 
Sloka 16.—A woman whose little toe or one next to 


it does not touch the earth, or whose fore-toe is longer 
than the big one, is the most sinful prostitute. 
saaieat Rheaeal Rus BR aR sar alaara 
TUATT AAT A YS HeABle Bat glaarany 12 
Sloka 16.—Miserable are the women whose shanks 
are full of veins, lean or very fleshy, hairy and whose 
calf-muscles are drawn up; so also are those whose geni- 
_tal organ has hairy oircles turned to the left, is low and 
narrow (small) and who have a pot-like belly. 


saatannaa ada goqa: | 
HTM TIA Alas TATA ULSI 


Adh. LXX. Sl. 19-22.] aafaadtsvara: 583 


Sloka 18.—The neck of a woman being too short 
leads to utter penury ; being too long, to the annihilation 
of the family ; and being too broad and flat (prominent ’), 
to her cruelty. 


aq Tan Har (TFS a at ator sawasisam Fe 
HN aa ysay fag Reales aan at azieq 11291 
Sloka« 19.—She who has squint (tremulous) or tawny 
or grey and fickle eyes, will be of a bad character; and 
she who, when smiling, shows dimples in her cheeks, is 
declared undoubtedly an unchaste woman. 
qastata sat ware wat eecgey Ras: aia F | 
afaiaaaeaarael A GA Wass al az ata Rell 
Sloka 20.—A woman whose fore-head is hanging 
over, will kill her husband’s brother ; if the belly is hang- 
ing, she will kill her father-in-law; if the buttocks, her 
own husband. A woman that ts too tall, as well as one 
whose upper lip is covered with too auch hair, is harmful 
to her husband. 


Wal AWA asareaqnt asa cara Waa a HT | 


Yar BUST AM sats Ba Sala FT Heoraiar tt 

Sloka 21.—Hairy, dark or unclean and too big 
breasts, and unequal ears produce misery. Big, protrud- 
ing and unequal teeth lead to sufferings ; and black gums 
to thievishness. 


HEUTS THREE ANTNSRAM AES | 
~ A A LN fo 
Ta: Musisay cadata ara: qatragtar: NR 
_ Sloka 22.—Hands that are dry (without flesh), full 
of veins, unequal and marked with the figures of beasts 
of prey, wolves, crows, herons, worms and owls make 
women unhappy and poor. 


584 | quetigarqa (Adh, LXX. Si. 23-26. 


aT TMs TERT Saal Hoare aT | | 
qa feng arta cin aatalaaa gor safes Ra - 
Sloka 23.—A woman whose upper lip is very high, 

and the hair rough at the tips, is fond of quarrel, Gene- 
rally, blemishes exist in those that are ugly or deformed ; 
and virtues divell tn those that have a pleasant appear- 
ance or form. 

Kalidasa in Kumarasambhava says in Canto V= 
qqeaa gaia gages a eaivessfvant aga: | aa fe a = 


The last quarter is suggested by Kalidasa and is worth its 
weight in gold. 


Tat ayeRl TAA Was we Bala q aargas | 
ASH FT aaradly ata: Hizka Waaae: uz 
Sat Haar WW Tea WaT warieaay | 
AY AAAAATAN BITMATAM GHA NLL 
TIA AAA FT GAN Asas eaa Frc | 
AYIA TABS WMA YAY WAT 2G! 

Slokas 24-26.—The feet with the ankle-joints are 
said to represent the first stage of life; the shanks with 
the knees, the second ; the genital organ, thighs and _tes- 
ticles, the third ; the navel and the hips, the fourth; the 
stomach, the fifth ; the heart and the breasts, the sixth ; 
‘the shoulders and the collar-bones, the seventh; the lips 
and the neck, the eighth; the eyes and the brows, the 
ninth ; and the head and the forehead, the tenth. When 
the feet and other limbs are inauspicious, the effects of 
the particular stages of life will be harmful; and good, 
when they are auspicious. | 


If a limb is lean and lank or full of veins, it is inauspicious; 
otherwise, good. The particular period of life denoted by a limb 
that is inauspicious will be miserable, etc.' 


‘Thus ends the 70th Adhyaya on ‘the Characteristics of Maidens.’ 


Adh. LXXI:.SI. 1-7.] qenaftedtsxara: §§5 
THSTTINY 1921! Omens from Slits, of Garments. 


; nese aeoTeTTETART | 
: meMAsHAgTa AAS AA: na 
Wit FT FRA sqgeaa ast | 
gata TAUTAATAA aaata: WR 
gage fighd aga aagaaa | 
ANTI FUSA TalTAsy BTaT NF!" 
RT HUATAS Warraea PTA | 
ai a aswaias Head wala: Nell 
agaiaa fark amasravag | 
ASSIA THA SA THUATTT Wl! 
Maaqat sata sory wala TATA | 
qeaaeat aaa Agaten Fagt wexaq |all 
AIG Ai alsa away wacqaaisa: | 
AGT HITT FT Meo ashyaareaesia AigHy (hell 


Slokas 1-7.—If one wears a new clothin Aswini, 
he will get ‘plenty of good cloths; if in Bharani, the 
cloth will be stolen; if in Krittika, they will be burnt; 
ifin Rohini, there will be acquisition of wealth; if in 
Mrigasira, fear of mice; if in Ardra, poverty; if in Pu- 
narvasu, performance of auspicious ceremonies; if in 
Pushya, acquisition of wealth; if in Aslesha, the cloth is 
destroyed ; if in Magha, death should be predicted ; if in 
Purvaphaleuni, there will be fear from the King; if in 
Uttara phalguni, acquisition of money; if in Hasta, ac- 
complishment of undertakings; if in, Chittra, there will 


be auspicious functions ; ; if in wrath eating of Selicions 
q & 74 8 


SR - \gngedifearsra. (Adh. LXXI: Sl. 8-10. 


food; if in Visakha, the person will be popular; if in 
Anuradha, there will be meeting of friends ; if in Jyeshtha, 
there will be loss of cloths; if in Moola, loss of cloths in 
water ; if in Purvashadha, there will be diseases; if in 
Uttarashadha, there will be sumptuous feast; if in Sra- 
vana, there willl be eye disease ; if in Dhanishtha, there 
will be gain of corn ; if in Satabhishak, there will arise 
great danger from poison ; if in Purvabhadrapada, there 
will be danger through water; if in Uttarabhadrapada, 
a son will be born ; and in Revati, there will be acquisi- 
tion of gems. 


Wigs aareat geaTAslt qorasia | 
Faas UMATATa TANAT A TERT HCI 
Sloka 8.—It is advisable to wear new cloths even in 
an asterism which is devoid of good qualities, provided 
it isan occasion of a marriage, reception of a sovereign, 
and honouring of Brahmins, 
TSA ROY TAT VI ATT TEA TTEATATEy | 
INSTT MaraaaAIy WUTITNTS.g NSM 
Sloka 9.—In the four corners of a cloth, dwell 


Gods; in the middle part: of , the 
broad sides, men; and the re- 


maining three divisions belong to} Men o > 

the devils. The same rule applies 

to couches, seats and sandals. Gods | Devils Gods 
fa atiataragaeee sed V_za = Rem | 


(| ge aaseqrerat gah Wt ga mufragadia WR ott 
"Bloke 10,--When_a cloth is stafned with ink (soot), 
' cowdung, mud and the like, when itis cut (slit), singed 


Gods | — sit 


Adh, LXXI. SI. 11-14.] Geaqitestseare: SF 


of torn, one ought to know that the effects, good or bad, 
will be full, when it is mew; middling, when used for a 
short time ; and almost nil, when it is old. These effects 
are greater in the case of upper cloths. 


eargatacaqalt aeqe Gaeensea AA TAT | 
MASATITTAT ATMS: Way TIA Arar U2 2H 
Sloka 11,—A slit, etc.,in the divisions of devils bode 
disease or death of the wearer ; in those of men, birth of 
a son and power; in those of Gods, increase of enjoy- 


ments; and in the borders, it is said to be invariably 
harmful. 


PEYUCHKUARHHAUNTMANTSISAT: | 
SAHA ATTN Gat wt Tyas BU uel 
Sloka 12.—A slit in the form of a heron, pelican (?), 
owl, pigeon, crow, bird of prey, jackal, donkey, camel or 


snake, though happening in a division belonging to Gods, 
causes among men a danger amounting to death. 


SAAS ABTA AA MITAHEA TTA: | 
Saarenaaaas gat Raat a Aor wedky ea 


Sloka 13,.—A slit of the shape of an umbrella, ban- 
ner, Swasthika, Vardhamana, Bilwa tree, water-pot, 
lotis, arch-way, etc., though found in a division of devils, 
brings fortune immediately to men. 


faaqaea yaded ae Raefraraaaecay | 
UG TH eikacait wis qararartens arg gv . 
Sloka 14.—.\ hgw cloth, even at an: unlucky aste- 
rism, will give good effects; when it is worn with the 


a igetdneaiary [AdH, LX XIE SI. 1-3; 


permission of Brahmins, or when" it is a gift from the 
king or when it is ‘presented: at a marriage occasion. 


The idea is the same as in Sloka.8 supra. 


Thus ends the 71st Adhyaya on “ otis from Slits of 
Garments.” 


AUATANT ['92l Signs of Chowries. 


Saaqqa: fee aexa: wer Rasarenearg | 
HaHa Alea aah Hoy sear Harz 21 


Sloka 1.—They say that the Gods created the Ch2- 
mara deer in'the caves of the Himalayas for the sake of 
their hair (tails). The hairs growing on their tails are 
some yellowish, some black, and some white. 


Mel BAI -AFAsal a aqqaenieieqeqaseay |. 

SS 2 ° Con wm ‘ ~ 

Weel FP Wal YUTAFISH (a gleIgqils + Weare Il 
Sloka 2.—The excellences of the chowries ire de- 

clared to be glossiness (gloss), tenderness, density of 

the hair, brightness, being connected with a slender bone 


and whiteness. Those that are piecred, small or broken 


off, are inauspicious. 
~ 


ATAUAdsa ser zasaar Raa swaea: | 
BOR H UHI Aas Ray Ug ut 

Sloka 3.—The handle of the chowrie must measure 
one cubit, or one and a half, or even smaller cubit, (with 
the fist closed). One made of auspicious . wood, decked 
with gold. or. silver, and’ set with | “all kinds of gems, is 
‘favourable to ‘kings. | 


LEXXIL 4-6, LXXI11. 1.) Maateadidvara: ' B89 


ASMATA TAT ATA HATA ATA TT | 
saiiaaealagaran apne fara cE Nell 
Sloka 4.—The handles of clubs, umbrellas, goads, 
canes, buws, canopies, spears, banners and chowries of 
Brahmins, Kshatriyas, Vaisyas and Sudras, being of the 
colours, yellow, yeliowish-red, honey colour and dark 


respectively, are favourable to the persons of the respec- 
tive classes. 


WMIYIAFSAMA Tnggqaaay wits! | 


OS (po ax a ~ a 
Mighigniaasa: wary TeMeaata: AA HIT Ui! 

Sloka 5,—-The above objects with an even number 
of joints (knots), viz., two, four, six, eight. ten and 
twelve, produce respectively, loss of mother, jand, wealth, 
family, disease and death. 


maltigtgrat Rag san wyat Ta | 
Tg: WAMATssaUgeITegAY Talay gt 
Sloka 6.—If the joints are odd, v7z., three, five, 
seven, nine, eleven or thirteen, the effects for the owners 
are respectively, victory in the marching (success in the 
journey), destruction of enemies, abundamn: profits, acqui- 
sition of Jands, increase of domestic animals and the 
accomplishment of the desired objects. 


Thus ends the 72nd Adhyaya on “ Signs of Chowries.”’ 


SASYNY |9Ril Signs of Umbrellas. 


fia q.taeds geargaqeacarat a 
+ Maeda ake ( aaeaeeentd gaz uti 


590 qerdigerer [Adh, LXXIII- Sl. 246; 


THIRST WIeATATSNAS waaqay | 
A TATA GTS J 1 

areraaedd aq aatad Tey ATTNT | 

saaars Beat Asaas F UI 


Slokas 1-3—A white umbrella of the following des- 
cription brings all round happiness and victory to a king. 
It is to be made of the feathers of swans, cocks, peacocks 
or cranes ; it must be covered all round with a fresh, white 
silken cloth. It must be adorned with pearls and have 
garlands of pearls suspended a!l round from its edges ; 
its handle is made of crystal; the rod of a single wood 
is six cubits in length, covered with pure gold and having 
seven or nine joints. The extent or diameter is 3 cubits, 
It should be well-knit all over and adorned with gems. 


gauges: sagas F | 
QUSISHIAEM ANIAHASTAMT UII 
Sloka 4—The rod of the umbrella of a Yuvaraja, 
Queen, Commandant of the army anda (General is 44 
cubits in height and 23 cubits in extent or diameter. 
AATGNT WATTS TaNIeAy | 
SMBMALAMS ST BI F ATT U4 
Sloka 5.—The umbrella of other officers of the’state 
should be formed with pea-cock feathers so as to 
ward off the Sun's heat and having wreaths of gems 
hanging all round; its top being adorned with gold fillets 
‘as a token‘of royal favour. 
— weNT T at glaravaey g aqua | 
| aaENyS ST ST g fog a 


Adh. LXXIV, SI. 1-2.] eq:asftesitsvara: 591 


Sloka 6.—The umbrella of ordinary persons should 
be of a square form, capable of warding off cold and 
heat. That of Brahmins should be circular and have a 
cylindrical rod. 


Probably the author means that the rod of private persons’ 
umbrellas should be square and that for Brahmins, cylindrical. 


Thus ends the 73rd Adhyaya on the “* Signs of Umbrellas.” 


Ee ee 


AIAAAEAWT (981! Praise Of Women. 


aa aftsan quae at ge ae aaa Yara | 
GAN ALI YA I Sl WAIssqST UsTTTS AE: 211 


Sloka 1.—When a country is conquered, the most 
important thing there is only a city whereof the essen- 
tial part is a mansion, and in this the most desirable 
portion is only aroom; and even here the most beauti- 
fu) thing is a couch, whereon an excellent damsel, ador- 
ned with gems and gold ornaments, is the pith and essence 
of the happiness accruing from the possession of a king- 
dom, 


This reminds one of Valmiki’s statement “Seiaqesd aa 
aarat arcaaia aera i’ This chapter is on a par with Bhartri- 
hari’s Sringara Sataka (agicsat) and will have great attraction 
for people of widely differing tastes as “ wizq (Wawasae agarcata 
aurciaaa.'’ Some of the statements in this chapter sound rather 
frivolous and light-hearted. The purpose is most probably to 
please the patron-sovereign of the author, who requires the plea. 
sure of the company of a sweet-heart after a strenuous career of 
wars of conquest, 


verti fratta alee yard aierat A TARR | 
eat eran qeeercett Tt ceri RaaRATRTET URN 


592 wersterara [Adh. LXXIV. Sh $4: 


_. Sloka 2.—Damsels beautify gems and they. are not 
adorned by the lustre of the latter; for they captivate: 
the heart even without the aid of gems; but the gems 
do not without their association with beautiful maidens, 

The last quarter can be interpreted as —What are gems (the 
greatest things) but union with damsels ? _ : 
et on . et es e \_e @ 
wat ited yas wd aghgat 
dea Peaqzat HaHATASTINIAa_sy | 
aang Maraansat ada 
Vaasa qasa: Heaaafagag 31 
Sloka 3.—The embrace of a sweet-heart affords a 
bit (an iota) of pleasure to the kings who have to sup- 
press their feelings, who strive to vanquish the forces of 
their foes, who deeply ponder over diplomatic methods 
that are replete with the ramifications of huncreds of 
things that are done and not done, who act upon the 
advice given by their ministers, who apprehend danger 
from every quarter (suspect every body) and who are 
consequently plunged, so to say, in the ocean of misery. 
Uneasy lies the head that wears a crown’; so in the midst 
of his miserable and care-worn life, the company of a sweet 
partner gives a king at least some pleasure fer some time. This 


of course for the poor soul shculd not be grudged by the people 
lest his life should be a burden and a liability, 


Id TY UIE eraat ant Sea 
a wi aleaseaq wiaat Ha sraafaar | 
aed GAs QUaIaACAMla | gal 
Ts BEF Hleas TATATST AlaTaa? Ui 


Sloka 4.~~Nowhere has the .cfeator’ designed | any 
gem ; other :than women ;" fpr, this. gem gives ‘delight 


Adh. LXXIV. SI. 5-?.] aqsaateaaisvare: 593 


to men, when heard of, seen, touched or even remem- 
bered ; for its sake are done righteous deeds and wealth 
amassed ; from that do men derive worldly pleasures and 
offspring. Such damsels are the goddesses of fortune. 
Hence they should always be honoured at home with 
respect and wealth. 


This reminds one of Manu’'s dictum “ a9 14% qsaeg CHT TT 
zaar:'’ 2 e.,Gods dwell with pleasure in a house where ladies 
are treated with respecé. 


ascagatat aaghea Zlar4 FUT TAN guy Aaa | 
a gaat H yaa Aaa aRaaeattr 7 ay Far elt 


Sloka 5.—It is my conviction that those wio, follow- 
ing the path of renunciation or detachment, overlook 
the virtues of and traduce ladies, are indeed wicked and 
cynical. For they do not mean what they say. 


TFA AT BAUSHAlaL TVS Al araitay Wasa: | 
ara glea: vagr face qoriraren. Aas AAT It 
Sloka 6.—Tell me the truth, what fault is there 
in women that is not committed by men? Men have 
traduced women as being impudent (or men have out- 
done women in impudence), They are indeed superior 


to men in respect of merits. And the following are the 
statements of Manu on this point. 


aHRTATAATST aeaa: ftgat freq | 
ats arage Tanaenaa: Baz woll 


Sloka 7.—The Moon gave them (women) purity ° 
(cleanliness); Gandharva, cultured and sweet speech ; 
the Fire, the capacity to eat all sorts of food. Hence 


women are like unto pure gold. 
G75 : 


594 geeaigaraa (Adh. LXXIV. SI. 8-12. 


STAN Wea AAT TWAT ASAT Was | 
AAA Fad Aca: at Teaea aga: licit 
Sloka 8.—Brahmins are pure at the feet; cows at 


the back ; goats and horses, at the face (mouth); and 
women are pure all over. 


faa: qaaas dat gaia ahetag | 
ane ana wit Gat gHaKITTHNT USN 


Sloka 9.—Being objects of matchless purity, never 
are women defiled, For the menses remove their ble- 
mishes every month. 


aaa aia tee agesaafagiran: | 
Gia Hulgaala faaqsaled AAeaa: 1201! 


Sloka 10.—Those houses that are cursed by res- 
pectable ladies (daughters-in-law) being not properly 


treated, will totally perish, as if destroyed by which-craft. 
AMA At BMiaai at aera: SlHat FIT | 
2 HaMTafaeal Haat Ts Hat TAT Le 
Sloka 11.—Whether it is the wife orthe mother, 


men are brought into being only by women. What good 
can you expect, O ungrateful men, from censuring them? 


asa wats aet sae gatas: israredt aan eiga: 
QIAss | AFRasaaa ezareraaraa | wear & gaara a aia 
aat marata sia: | 
SFTASTLH ST AAS BA ATaBar | 
AU AF TAAGHA GATT AWAFAT (8 


Sloka 12.—It has been established in the moral code 
that the guilt of husband and wife will be equal, if both 


Adh. LXXIV. SI. 13-16 ] agq:an@aatscara: 595 


go astray. But men do not pay any heed to their sins. 
Hence women are better in this respect. 


afesian a Waray Aiea: aTaAOTT | 
arian Prat qeteqacar yeaa? a 
Sloka 13 —A man guilty of going astray in matters 


sexual will be-absolved of the sin by begging alms for 
six months, wearing a donkey’s hide with its hair exposed. 


IEC CUCRECIUIC CGR ECIOR OE 
amiaeen faded att day afta: ween 


Sloka 14.—Even when men complete acentum of 
years, their sexual craving does not subside; but they 
refrain from the act only through incapacity, whereas 
women do so by conviction and courage. 


me aeanargat Pecaaag: feat | 
anata arnt fag Ares wera 4H 


Sloka 15.—How impudent are the immoral fellows 
that slander blameless women! They are like the thieves 
actually found stealing and yet crying—‘“ Thief, stop !”’ 


The aforesaid quotations amply prove :Manu’'s great regard 
for women and how they were treated in ancient India, where 
there was no necessity for women to fight for equality. 


geragena aitatat goa aia wel a ait Garg | 
GHIKTAUA Walaa Wagied AAS Rett 


Sloka 16.—A man does not resort subsequently to 
the same coaxing words and actions as done in privacy 
with his sweet-hearts ; whereas the latter embrace their 
dead husbands out ofegratitude for the good turns done 
unto them, and enter their funeral pyre. 


596 geeaitatara, = [Adh. LXXIV. Sl. 17-20. 


In the days of Varahamihira, Suttee must have been in great 
vogue. But Bana, the great poet, expresses his antipathy to 
this custom. 
ateranista aa we Asaish arreaaaiatsat | 
USI AUSTAAHAA TMATIITATIS BI 1120911 

Sloka 17.—A man who enjoys the gem of a damsel 
is for the time being, (to me) a king, though he is penni- 
Jess. For the quint-essence of a kingdom consists of 
dainty food and damsels ; and all the rest is only fuel for 
kindling the fire of appetite. 


mifaal TAAATANeTa BETIS eq | 

Teal AAI ST Al CAs ATT TlaAaasiea F alas cil 
Sloka 18.—It is my firm conviction that the erotic 

bliss that is enjoyed by one’s embracing a loving damsel 

in the prime of youth, with swelling bosoms, and mar- 


muring sounds, gentle, sweet, tender and suppressed, 


cannot be had even in the Creator’s Heaven (Brahma- 
loka. 


This reminds one of Bhartrihari's—aatayg aqat wiraaea: ara: 

at tagiagaridaleaqataeraaarg | 

Ha aaTnaastea fe Ga axe: qazarsy a fay 1231! 

Sloka 19,-Tell me what pleasure is there in Brahma 

Loka, owing to the Gods, Sages, Siddhas and celestial 

bards attending upon the Manes and other Worshipful 

Beings, such as cannot be found in embracing a damsel 

in privacy. 

Mawaleeaae tae Felsatien sa AAR | 

fiers ar ay aagacadiasht sengiial gaa Rel 
“ Bloka 20.—The whole universe, from Brahman to 

the smallest worm, is based on the union of the miale 


Adh. LXXV. SI. 1-2.] taanitaatseara: 597 


and female. Why then should we feel ashamed of it, 
when even Lord Siva was forced to take four faces on 
account of his greed to have a look at a maiden? 

The story alluded to here is that once the celestial courtezan 
Tilottama, was going round Lord Siva on whose lap was seated 
Parvati, The lord being afraid of offending Parvati created four 


faces for himself in order to look at the matchless beauty of the 
damsel. 


Thus ends the 74th Adhyaya on © the Praise of Women.” 


alavaRTY li94ll Winning of Affection. 


We AATAIGS Yaqwq aa- 
aMaaaTAATE Aaa | 
Raq waa saat a a 
Ta Tas Tea era TA 


Sloka 1.—The man who is loved by damsels en- 
joys all the sexual pleasures in the most excellent manner, 
while others enjoy only sham pleasures; because, the 
woman has her mind elsewhere. A woman develops a 
foetus similar to the man whom she thinks of at the time 
of coitus, though she be far off from him. 


HEPAT BOE TzTaageal het seat aeaarala agq | 
at area wad aig ya: ahralay AaTaTTAT Uz 


Sloka 2,-—Just ag a branch cut off from a tree or a 
seed planted in the soil does not change its nature, 7. @», 
does not grow into a different tree, even so is the soul re- 
born in women. Bat owing to the influence of the 
soi or ‘mother,’ slight differencé does occur. 


598 geeaigarata, = [Adh, LXXV. SI. 3-6 


Ara aefa aaa aa ziegaqy 

aida aiecaraa wa Ty ale | 
qiaisaaa waa: Raneaae 

aiMeaay agit GT WaSTAICAT 13H 


Sloka 8.—The soul combines with the mind, the 
mind with the senses, and the senses with their respec- 
live objects. This takes place in quick succession, The 
connection being such, is there anything unattainable for 
the mind ? And whither the mind goes, thither goes the 
soul too ! 


Mea wat TeAstraeat 
TASISA HAAT Taaiwarany | 


~\ ¢@ 


a4 fafacaata aid @ aeaaed 
TM? FATAT TAT FAT Vi! 

Sloka 4.—The soul which is very subtle is immersed 
in the Supreme Soul in the region of the heart (gegreérs). 
Such a soul should be comprehended by a_ steadfast 
mind through constant practice. Since every person at- 
tains the nature of one whom he constantly thinks of, 
young women mentally go only to their beloved ones. 

anaorae Garaedasyt aeaiaaer | 
aa 0 
AMINE FERTUTATET TM Tea ATA tt 

Sloka 5.—Favourableness or courtesy is thé sole 
cause of winning the affection of the opposite sex; a 
contrary conduet engenders aversion, Charms, potions 


and such other quack remedies produce only many harm- 
ful effects and not happiness. 


meraarate free ard shaeaayrreaashrara | 
Swen saraaasharl Sawada aq Tas gu 


Adh, LXXV. SI. 7-10.] taaafiaarseara: 599 


Stoka 6.—Man becomes the idol of woman by for- 
saking pride; and arrogance produces repulsion. A 
haughty person accomplishes his objects with great diffi- 
eulty, whereas one speaking sweetly does it easily. 
aa a aay aaa Tea a TtreAaenfiay | 
SI WaIAIgga 4 Aware a Hxerat J 191 

Sloka 7.—It is not valour to be fond of rash deeds;” 
mor to speak harsh words that are generally uttered by 
ruffans. Those who are not arrogant, nor boastful even 
after accomplishing their task, are ale, 


a: aaaey GUTAUAS_M A AID AAU | 


weals Vuaadscasary wa al TreHat BULA 1c! 
Sloka 8.—One wishing for universal love should ex- 
press others’ virtues behind their back; while a person 
referring to the faults of others gets too many unmerited 
charges levelled against him. 


AAUTHUTITAD BR AUTHCUATa AT | 
Braga feat Fag Al Hilawia a at wa Il 


Sloka 9.—The whole world renders service to a man 
who is engaged in helping the people. The fame that is 
won by helping enemies in their distress cannot be had 
by a snall measure of religious merit. 
wana: git Aagarsaaas qasegae | 
HHS FRAT Seq TU TESA Te TTA uot 

Sloka 10.—The virtues of the good, though sup- 
pressed by the wicked, attain great eminence, just as fire 
blazes forth, though covered with grass. The person. 
who wishes to spoil another’s virtues has his own 
wickedness proclaimed? 

' ” ‘Phus-ends the 75 Adhyaya on the ‘‘ Winning of Affection.” 


600 geedigarara (Adh. LXXVI. Sl. 14 


Hleaiday IN9§ 1! Erotic Remedies. 


HATH Bl TOIT YR AGAR AlTAYRAea | 
qaica: garasiia aacans caraatay 2 
Sloka 1.—When (at the time of coitus) the blood 
(of the woman) exceeds the sperm (of man), a female 
will be born ; when the sperm exceeds the blood, a male; 
when both are equal, a nema Deroa! Hence, one 
— to take, tonics that i increase, one’s sperm. . “ 


" qehunagaraeena: areas ag arsar Par | 
* TERR WATKAT Tz: aa qT BR COME IC COMIRGL 
Sloka 2.—Cupid’s snare consists of the following 
group : v2z., a terrace, the Moon's rays, lilies, wine, an 
intoxicated sweet-heart, a lute, amatory talk, privacy and 
garlands. — 
This is reminiscent of the Sloka: 
aegaiueraga qaiequsaneaz a Aaa | 
ameat a ag: aaeia aaaaiieaaaraae: 
MAR UMIATU SE TH- 
qeraemagaia aay aisang | 
aaa falas waiaashy 
TSTARINT TIMTSt TIT 3i 
Sloka 8.—A man who eats for 21 days a mixture of 
equal quantities of araftearg (mineral honey), honey, mer- 
cury, iron-dust, ettaet (yellow myrobalan), fereragq (bitu- 
men), and ghee, though he be very old or an octoge- 


narian, will be able to please a damsel, as though he 
were a young man. 


at aa a: aftargys: Aig gt aig a aiseqt? | 
RTT TUa aT rE TeMATATAtT THAT liee 


Adh, LXXVI. SI. 5-8.] azaniianrseate: 601 


Sloka 4.—If one drinks milk boiled with Kapika- 
cchu roots or eats only six morsels of black-gram_ boiled 
in milk and ghee (in ghee prepared from milk itself), fol- 
lowed by a drink of milk, one will not be exhausted by 
women. 

a \ g g Was a 
aq aaa FH ageqilaaaad = | 
Tat WIA ATR HW A Fa AAs AYATs Wil 

Sloka 5.—A man having numcrous wives should 
take the powder of ratfiar, boiled seven times in its own 
sap and then concentrated, and drink with it boiled milk 
mixed with sugar. 
qainetat aaa aor gunad aighrasageg | 
Sigg Vea a Taster ae Peart get PVG O 

Sloka 6.—Boil well the powder of myrobalan with 
its own juice and mix it with honey, sugar and ghee. 
After licking this, drink milk according to your digestion ; 
then you will be able to enjuy sexual pleasures to the 
utmost. 


QW AUSZ A dat ABST Hai agarawry a | 
gaitaam i: Raa aise: %H aR: BA oi 
Sloka 7.—A lustful man should boil milk with goat's 
testes and sesamum several times and thus concentrate ite 
By «taking thac and drinking milk after that, he will 
put even the sparrow to shame by his exuberant virility. 
awarded alia weacaaaica 7 aU | 
a Ca ~ ey 
dlaacagiated ag ¢ Tay Aaa Az Llell 
Sloka 8.—Men who eat boiled 9f%#-(Shastika) rice’ 
with ghee and blacls gram soup and then drink milk, 
sleep on those nights after repeated sport of love. 


Shashtika rice is a kind of rice that grows in 60 days. 
ia 76 


602 | geedigarara [(Adh, LXXVI. SI, 9-14, 


aay asia is BU EF MH Se com ate mermermeryp nemeronch © ernee: 


faaaaeaehtaseqahatartarrcat: | 
mia fis: Gaal gaat WH aaewseieanagea [SU 
Sloka 9.—A mixture of sesamum, Aswagandha, Ka- 
pikachchu, Vidarika and Shashtika rice, the whole ground 
in goat’s milk and then boiied in ghee, will be like the 
asset (Sashkuli) eatable and will increase sperm (be a 
good aphrodisiac). 
alion ar mgunigaia aitarmeaRyg at | 
gia deans saase aaa Beeaar Wig iol 
Sloka 10,—If the virility of aman diminishes, he 
should take either tet or fagter roots boiled in mile. 
Then his sexual power will remain unimpaired. If he 
suffer from dullness of the digestive apparatus, he might 
take the following powder. 


AAUTSAN sida BRaatear a cqat | 


AITHATSIM ATs ageigataary le 2 
Sloka 11.—A mixture of equal quantities of Aja- 
moda, rock-salt, @ira@@t, ginger and Pippali, soaked in 
liquor, butter-milk, gruel or hot-water and drunk, 
promotes digestion. 
AIABaMsaAiles HE ati 
a: qiMAIgols 4 arate | 
raQadiaiea: q HUCAAHIY 
SHAY AUAA FAAASIAATIT 12 li 
Sloka 12.—QOne who eats excessively sour, bitter, 
salt or pungent things and meals chiefly consisting of a 
boiled mixture of things and leafy vegetables (or saline 
. pot-herbs), will lose the power of sight, sperm and man- 
hood, and on getting a damsel, he Will, however young, 
make several sham attempts, as if he were an old man. 
Thus ends the 76th Adhyaya on “Erotic Remedies’’' °* 


Adh. LXXVII. SI. 1-4.] aqaerfaatseara: 603 


TSqATST? IK9\9l1 Preparation of Perfumes. 


WUTTUATTINA 7 Tar JRA | 
Q ba’ q 
TMA HIAITaa STATA TATTATT UI 
Sloka 1.—Since garlands, perfumes, fine raiment, 
ornaments and the like do not shine in a manof grey 
hair, one ought to try to dye the hair, just as one does 
regarding uneuents for the eyes and ornaments. 


In the beginning of the Chapter the commentator quotes ex- 
tensively from a faa or lexicon, which gives the synonyms of 
various materials used in the preparation of perfumes. 


Be Wa MEsl_ BAT aS HBA aay | 
ery aed qi gErOAa eal ABE ACTITTA: Nl 
ad ata vet Aer caneavarmears Ty | 
ASHI Tht WeUTIT TANS Boga aq lt 
Slokas 2-8.—Put into an iron vessel grains of #txa- 
Kodrava and boil them in acid-eruel (vinegar); grind it 
well with iron dust and make a fine paste. Apply this to 
the head after washing the hair with acid-gruel, and 
covering the head with green leaves, remain for six 
hours. After that period, remove the paste from the 
head and apply a paste of myrobalan. Cover it with 
greén leaves and keep it for another six hours. On being 
washed, the hair will become black. 
ad ar aN 
TaNSUuAMAgIeqdsslettaney Masta | 
gaa URS went Usage AZ Hen 
Sloka 4.4—After that one should remove the smell 
of the iron and vinegar by bathing the head and by the 
application of perfumed hair oils,and then enjoy in the 


604 qeeeiitarary [Adh. LXXVII, S). 5-8, 


Leennaninimes re een Se en na eameen an iehammineasemeenmmeenieriminns 


harem the pleasures of kingship along with attractive 
perfumes and a variety of incense. 


CARH AUSRETHTAANTAS RASA! | 


Pacaaaaaenaas Praag 4 
Sloka 5.—A scented hair-water fit for kings is pre- 
pared from equal proportions of cassia-bark, costus, 
Renuka, Nalika, Sprikka, Rasa, Tagara, Valaka, Naga- 
-kesara and Patra. 


TSE STATA TIAN AAT AGHA TIT ATs | 


Asa TRISHA Hite Taran Faq uh 
Sloka 6.—Hair oil of the scent of Champaka is 
made from equal quantities of the powder of madder, 
cuttle fish bone, Nakhi, (shell perfume), cassia bark, cos 
tus and Rasa, which being mixed with gingelly oil should 
be heated in the Sun’s rays. : 


en ee " 
TEN TATVRAUBAINTT ys MUTT! 
ASMA THSISAAT HEAT yIeaa: | 
SHaAeISMeTH: AAS TT WIAeTHe 
Haeasaetishagwsy Wa Ta: aHETETS: Is] 
Sloka 7.—From equal quantities of Patra, juice of 
Sihla, Vala and Tagara, an oil called Smaroddeepana- 
‘kindler of passion 'is made. The same with Vyamaka 
and fumigated with Katuka, asafoetida, yields a perfutne 
called ‘ Bakula scent’, The same with costus is termed 
« Jotus-scent, ’’ and with sandal, ‘Champaka scent’. 


With nutmeg, cassia bark and coriander, it goes by the 
name of ‘ Jasmine scent’. 


TAUPO WAT TAGS A ST | 
AVAARAN Teg youl qeaaa iit 


Adh. LXXVII. SI. 9-11.] aaaaiaaatssara: 605. 


ARTS AE ees RAMAN ARS SS AURELIUS TS — ERELPIOOESS 


A A te ro Os Ray oP NEES aetna Menten nom 


Sloka 8.—Take one-fourth of Sathapushpa and 
Kunduruka, one-half of Nakha and Sihla, and one-fourth 
of Sandal and Priyangu. These make a perfume which 
should be fumigated with jaggery and Nakha. 


The commentator states: before fumigating with Guda, it 
should be done with Hareethaki. 


PICS MGM ATT PATA | 
Gea Alaiaisaqenraacaa: fos: 1191) 


Sloka 9—Guggulu, Valaka, lac, Musta seeds, Nakha 
and sugar in equal quantities constitute a compound _per- 
fume. Another is made from Jatamamsee, Valaka, Sihla, 
Nakha and sandal. 


atlamlaaaqagarageis: VSRABeaa | 
aaraaerase: warRalea YIU Teal AAlET Mott 

Slokas 10.—Many delightful perfumes are made 
from Haritaka, Sankha, Ghana, Rasa, Valaka, Jageery, 
costus, Saileya and Musta seeds by mixing them in 
proportions indicated by multiple of 4th. 


The words in the 3rd quarter have to be construed thus: the 
succeeding constituents should be Sth in excess of the preceding 
one, the first one being sth and the last §. 41% here is interpreted 
as a part in general and not as a quarter. By the usage of the 
word ‘ many ’, it is evident that the 9 constituents may be mixed 
in any order, taking care to see that no two are mixed in the 
same proportion. For example, by mixing one part of Hareetaka 
two parts of Sankha, three of Ghana, etc., the other constituents 
being increased in this order, one kind of perfume is formed. 
Since it is not necessary that the order of the constituents should 
be the same, /9 or 362880 perfumes can be prepared. 


atieaih: fadtagen: wlasant aapTE = | 
wieate myRe easy HITT TT FETT: ENN 


606 geeiterara (Adh. LXXVII. Sh. 12-14, 


_ Sloka 11,—-Four parts each of sugar, Saileya and 
Musta, two parts each of Sri Vasaka and Sarja juice, and 
one part each of Nakha and Guggulu, mixed with the 
powder of camphor and made into a lump of ball with 
honey, make a royal perfume called “ Kopacchada ”’— 
Anger-lid. | 

One Iswara has written a work in Prakrit on the art of pre. 
paring perfumes. The commentator quotes the following verse 
from him. 

BiBia Mya a fesag ae gla at atweir | 
ag ST Tt Boot qoulain wesuegt a|t i 
wie Mat at ctaa aa gia @ aia: | 

aha: FAAP ATHA AVAeg: A: 

A liquid mixed with another liquid is called 44, while a ‘pow- 
der with another is diz. 


ATA AMA: BEAaTia Aqarqee: | 

ZANT: TATST ATRL 22 
Sloka 12—Take equal quantities of cassia bark, 
andropogon and Patra and a half-quantity of small car- 
damoms and pound them to fine powder, which should 
be enriched with musk and camphor. It will make an 
excellent toilet powder (perfume for clothes). 


FAUSHISARBWUAAMTFETG | 
SMAAA TRYOUT HATTA KA Nan 
PACTASASA ASS Teaaasglara: | 
 waetragtaiieaiat aaa 128 
_* Slokas 13-14.—The Gandharnava or perfume ocean ° 
is prepared from sixteen substances, if every four of them 


are permuted variously at will and that in one, two, three, 
or four parts, The substances are :—ga, atee, Waa, wee 


§ 


Adh. LXXVIL. Sl. 15-18.] qnaniaaatstata: 602 ce 


Sei, AMT, SAMAR, CTS, ATS, AZA6, AS, aM, coriander, 
Sqr, Ge, and sandal. | 


Ghana Balaka | Saileya | Karpura Here, alto- 

Sareea laa PA peas oe gether 96 vari- 
aga- yaghra- at cam 

Useera putbae ae Sprikka tee are got. 

me YCEach ~—s set. of 

Aguru Madanaka aca | eee. four ‘has. <4 

Dhanya | Karchura Chola | Malaya permutations 


es and so the four 
sets together have 24 x + or 96. See the diagram in the margin. 


MIATA AHA MAHI IgA, | 
BTA ATA al rararaeay u2e4i! 
Sloka 15.—In no perfume should more than one 
part of coriander be uscd, for its smell is too powerful. 
Camphor should be used in a still lesser proportion. 


These two ought not to be mixed in two, three, or 
four parts. 


faigeraa yatacan: wary fuse: | 
Tras HeacHar Sa: BIEagaay 1/2811 
Sloka 16—All the above drugs should be fumigated 
‘by Srivasaka, resin, jaggery and Nakha severally before 
all the ingredients are mixed together, and then they 
should be mixed with musk and camphor. 
o AT ARAAIVIAET a Fy AgaAZarin | 


ea satis aq alagena Neary Hon 
Sloka 17.—The number of perfumes resulting from 
the sixteen ingredients being mixed in all possible com. 
binations is 174720-(4000+70000+ 100000+720), 


uemaeani eeraqaitiedd zea | 
. Reeaat aehragatlts get ee 


608 qeeaftarara [Adh. LXXVII. SI. 19-94. 


Sloka 18,—Each drug taken in one proportion being 
combined with three others in two, three and four pro- 
portions successively makes six kinds of scents. So do 
they, when taken in two, three and four proportions. 


ZEAFALAAM TAA aMaaAway | 
wd AUT Tua: aafqsissy 12311 
Sloka 19.—As in this manner four substances com- 


bined in different proportions yield 2 perfumes ; so tug 
the other tetrads. Hence the sum will be 96. 


qieaa cea wane Haag | 
HNC Alaa Jatla aleaa faa Nols 
Sloka 20.—Out of a collection ef sixteen kinds of 


substances, the number of perfumes that can be made by 
selecting any four will be 1820. 


VTA AAA ABET AT AAAI | 
TTA: BA A ASAT VAT AeA NV 
Sloka 21,—Since this quantity combined in four 
different ways admits of 96 variations, this number 1820 


must be multiplied by 96. The product will be the total 
of possible combinations of perfumes. 


TA TAT Haat TH Slat aera vazita Weary | 
qeantner: waTistradta aia fag: gateaata: lez 
Sloka 22,—Write in a vertical column the numbers 
1 to 16 upwards; ina second column by its side write 
gne, and then write above that the sum of the first 
two figures of the first column, viz, 3; add this result 
to the third number and write ipabove that; continue 


this process until you reach the penultimate number, 
t.¢.,15. | Repeat this process in the third and fourth 


' Adh. LXXVII. Sl. 23.) aaanftaststara: 609 


columns also. The last number of the 
last column will reveal the number 
1820. (See figure in the margin). 


The numbers 1, 2, 3...... 16 in the first Pane Oe Mine vcad 
column represent respectively the 16 sub- 
stances mentioned in slokas 18-14, susra 
(pp. 606-607). Firstly, let the first 3 sub- Fiori sel oa0l are 
stances be considered as constant and any SS Fee SEE (ee 
one of the remaining as variable. The num- 
ber of perfumes formed will be 13. Next» 
taking substances 1, 3, and 4 as constant and 
one of the rest as variable, we get 12 varie- 
ties. Proceeding further in the same map- SSaeie / Sana (eras ner 
ner, we get 11, 10, 9, 8, 7, 6, 5, 4, 3, 2, 1 
varieties, or 91 in all. 


36; 120} 33 


Now let the substances 1, 2 and 4 be 
considered as constants and one of the re- 
maining as variable, we get 12 perfumes, 
By taking 1, 3 and 5 as constants, the num- 
ber will be 11, and soon. The total will thus be 78. 


Similarly making 1, 2,5; 1, 3,6; 1,4, 7 etc., as constants, 
we shall get 11, 10, 9, 8, 7, 6, 5, 4. 3, 2, 1 or a total of 66 
varieties. 

Thus we shall get 91, 78, 66, 55, 45, 36, 28, 21, 15, 10, 6, 3, 
1 or 455 in all. Proceeding in the same way with other combina- 
tions, the several totals will be 364, 286, 220, 165, 120, 84, 56, 35, 
20, :10, 4, 1 or a grand total of 1820. 


The process to get at the above figures as enunciated by 
Bhattotpala in his commentary is circuitous and confusing. This 
is only the number of combinations of 16 things taken 4 at a time 
C2°C, ) 6 1820. 


fantaneatage: wi TeRIsT | 


erage: Breggenan Sa: 1821 
g. ue 77 


610 geeditatata (Adh. LXXVIT. Sl. 24-27,’ 


ererermareot RIA HARAVITATAT: | 
AULAT AAHSAAS MBH TST VM! 


Slokas 23.24.—Make a diagram consisting of 16 
compartments as shown below and place them with their 
respective proportions as : 


wa 3 | que 5 gaa 8 
gs | ow 2 eat 3 


wa 4 | tae J | are 7 nieve 


. 7a 6 | wits 4 Brae | 


HSAH HSE At ay Pad qacey | 
YSANTD AAAS TeaeTay ATT URN 
a ¢ 
AMINA AA HITAHAT at: | 
YTAV TA Ne? BISA ATA ARE: UU 
Slokas 25-26.—In a receptacle of 16 dlvisions in 

whatever manner (horizontally, vertically or diagonally). 
you may mix four substances, you get 18 proportions for 
each of the various compounds of perfumes. Each of 
the compounds should be blended with Nakhi, Tagara 
and Turushka,, be enlivened (mixed) by nutmeg, ca:n- 
phor and musk; and be fumigated with jaggery and 


Nakha. In this way are made scents called ‘ Sarvatu- 
bhadra '—‘ good for all oe 


MAGS THT AT TACHA ATT | | 
weaisa Uftstaarahesrataslas NV” 


Sloka 27,—-Many perfumes for the mouth with the 
smell of Parijata flower are prepared’ from any tetrad 


Adh. LXXVII. SI. 28.32.] agagfaaatscarz: 611 


aniong the above-named ones. They should be en- 
livened with nutmeg, musk and camphor and sprinkled 
with mango-juice and honey. 


ancataraanraeara Asa TTT: | 
MAaAATh: Mala asxeava: Nel! 


Sloka 28.—A]l those scents into whose composition 
enter resin and Srivasaka become perfumes for bathing 
with Valaka and Twak taking the place of the above two. 


Uniateragegeraa ag TATE: | 
TIBIBTR TS FETKOT ATT AggZeA WR 

: VIATOR ATT aR qeH MATT 
wgeRsyS TA: PAWEAMAITA As (Jott 


Slokas 29. 30.—Make a receptacle of nine divisions 
Lodhra | Useera | Nata ane er een 
_| the following : Lom 
Musta | Patra dhra, Usira, Nata 
nena a (Tagara), Aguru, 
“Musta, Patra, Pri- 
yangu, Vanas and Pathya. Take a triad of sub- 
stances from amongst them and add to them 
one part each of Sandal and Turushka, a half 
of Nakha and a quarter of Satapushpa, and 
fumigate them with Katuka, Hingula and jag- 
gery, In this way are prepared 84 perfumes 
of the fragrance of Bakula flower. 


- 


Vanas | Pathya 


AME WT eiaalytdga Fearreat 
mea eS T Yat itiateawgries RCN 
THAHIATAUGA ATS Ta 

sae HAST BPacHS Hraeaay uzVIWt 


612 weeefkerdia, [Adh. LXXVII. Sh. 33-36, 


Anse: STIMa ra: | 
qaqa aratacitat: arantae ua 


Slokas 31-33.—Put tooth-sticks for a week in cow’s 
urine mixed with the powder of Haritaki and then taking 
them out, dip them again in scented water, which is to be 
prepared from small cardamoms, Twak, Patra, Anjana, 
honey, pepper, Nagakesara and costus. Keep the sticks 
in this for some time (half a night); then powder them 
with a mixture of four parts of nutmeg, two of Patra, 
one of small cardamoms and three of camphor, and let 
them dry in the Sun’s rays. 

For tooth sticks, see Chap. 85 infra. 

TTA aaa sia Waa guicaat & | 

o o ¢ 

waa: aagai 4 ars gata wigraaHRaTATy Mt 
Sloka 34.—Such tooth-sticks give the user freshness 


of colour, facial lustre, cleanliness of the mouth, fine 
smell and an agreeable voice. 


wl qaltala KIalteTa 
A ° 
aaAvaMaald Taguicaat = | 
ae auf anata fret cat- 
Me*ATATe THT KUT Ua 
Sloka 35.—Betel stimulates love, sets off the phy- 
sical charm, creates popularity, gives good smell to the 
mouth, strengthens the body, and dispels diseases arising 
from phlegm. It also bestows many other benefits, 


Tot Via BNI wt wags wraelatay | 
qitea stearate ware arg Bas aeay 118g tI 


Sloka 36.—A moderate dose of lime used with betel- 
leaves gives good colour ; an extra quantity of ateca-nat. 


LXXVII. 37, LXXVIII. 1-2.] weanftaatseqra: 613 


spoils the colour; excessive lime produces bad smell in 
the mouth, but an extra quantity of betel-leaf, pleasant 
smell. 


qniiwe tary aa ane feat a 
qHietaMae era | 
PRASWMSAS BSAA - 
Wasa AzgeI ged BALA lt 


Sloka 37.—At night it is beneficial to have an oveg- 
dose of betel-leaf, while by day, of areca-nut- To 
change this order is a mere farce of betel~chewing. 
When betel-leaf is made fragrant by Kakkola, areca-nut, 
clove and Jatee, it makes one happy with the joy of 
amorous intoxication. 


Thus ends the 77th Adhyaya on “ the Preparation of Perfumes.” 


gekaaraia: itecll Union of Man and Woman. 


gan aisraypeea Reed at meet wera 
faanievata a ager Fat ear fees arian eH 
od face setae cary sTeazisargata: fey | 
tal fear: gereasalq sifaca: saan: aTATA NA 
Slokas 1-2.—They say that king Viduratha was 
murdered by his own queen with a weapon concealed in 
her tresses, and the king of Kasi by his disaffected queen 
by means of her anklet smeared with poison. Thus woe 
men, when they are disgusted with one, bring about 
calamities amounting to danger to life. What is the 
use of enumerating otleer troubles ? Hence, men ought 


to. examine carefully whether the damsels are _— at- 
tached to or disgugted with them. 


614 geeatearamg =[Adh. LXXVIII. Sh. 3-6. 


@e qaaaHT BaTieg Aa 

ara T AAR TITT AANA 
qataaaaaalsarania 

BATH eaHeaAaATT 131 


Sloka 3.—Love springing from sexual desire is in- 
dicated by tell-tale blush, etc., by exposing the navel, 
arms, bosoms and ornaments, by re-tying the garments, 
by loosening the locks, by twitches and tremblings of the 
-eye-brows and by side-long glances. 

. Be Raagencswaa wenaaeata 
TAMRSATEAMA Qaagsrerataaal | 
IICE GRR IGUEE CR EDUC CC 
SIUNAA WTS TUR BA HRI Vl 

eat a fieaicgemasl fart aim aaa ata | 
frases ageala statin sate sary qoratsag U4 
aharia ates gaegie: Waddazayq | 

MASIAAwEd T Aisa Fa ust 

Slokas 4-6.—Other tokens of love are: loud clearing 
of the throat and spitting, loud laughter in the presence 
of the lover, rising towards him from couch or seat, pro- 
ducing sounds with limbs, yawning, asking for trivial and 
easily available things, embracing and kissing .a ‘child, 
Jooking significantly at a female companion, casting 
‘glances at him when he looks elsewhere, enumerating his 
‘virtues, and scratching the ears. A damsel who speaks 
sweetly, spends her own money (for his sake), feels de- 
lighted at his sight, forgets her anger, drowns his faults 
by extolling his virtues, honours his friends, hates his 
enemies, feels grateful to him for hig good turns, féels 


Adh. LXXVIII. Sl. 7-11] sgaattadiseara: 615 


miserable when he is away, offers her bosoms and lips, 
embraces him, perspires. and kisses him first, is also to be 
understood as one affectionately attached through her 
actions. 


ATHASl SRgaeA TSE Falawaiaz | 
MAEBA FUVATA F IUGSAA IVT F TAY N91! 
WUTUSITT YAS TT KUT Ta 7 VOUS aay | 
Srauaaa aad aals warcaghagia Taq ict 
Slokas 7-8.—The following are the indications of the 
disaffection of a woman :—A frowning face, turning away 
the face (from the lover), forgetting the good done by 
him, lack of interest in his presence, fretfulness, kindness. 
towards his enemies, harsh words, shuddering on touch- 
ing or seeing him, assuming arrogance, not preventing 


him from going away, wiping off the mouth after a lass, 
getting up last and yvoing to bed first. 


Page casa TAL aat: Harear wey | 
MMB FRA AA Aa Tar us 
~~ 0 
HPOMAAATATeA TMA: AeA | 
area: PASE TTAMMATETAT Holl 
Slokas 9-10.—Buddhistic nuns, female ascetics, 

hand-maids, nurses, virgins, washer-women, flower-sellers, 
corrupt women, female companions and barbers’ wives‘ 
serve as go-betweens. As these are the causes of the’ 
ruin of respectable families, one should carefully protect 


one’s women from them in order to enhance the reputa- 
tion and honour of the family. 


uatterameintara qTaeattrean: | 
BATA AT ieanre THIET U2 ail 


616 geedftamrg [Adh, LXXVIII. SI. 12-14, 


Sloka 11.—Nocturnal recreations, vigils, professions 
of iJlness, staying in another’s house, consultations with 
sopth-sayers, taking part in congregational mournings, 
and festivals are occasions when women come in contact 
with men. Hence they should be guarded on such 
occasions. | | 


Wal eosla asa UrHat atensaansar 
qey gqaftaisaeqaa saaawraat | 
Viana BAIT FAI Al AT 
agi grata 3 argacia sorraeaiea: Nez 


— Sloka 12.—A loving damsel will at first show no 
desire, but will not leave off amorous talk; in the be- 
ginning of the sexual act, she will be bashful and languid; 
in the middle, she will be devoid of bashfulness, and on 
the close, bashfully drop her face. Then again she will 
show, during coitus, various graceful expressions of senti- 
ment, and perceiving the disposition of her lover atten- 
tively adapt herself to him in movements indicative of 
weariness or otherwise as the case may be. 


aet gn Tarevrearatarafreraga: | | 
afl wtdat 3 TMeTag Sears aseqagza Far 12k 

Sloka 138.~—The excellences of women are youth, 
beauty, charming dress, favourableness, knowledge of the 
arts of winning man’s affection, graceful gait, etc. The 
best of those, possessed of the above excellences are 
termed ‘ Gems of women ’, whereas others, for a cultured 
man, are only ‘ Feminine Diseases.’ 


a sruaiioh wasn feagraereat = guig | 
aq WTSI TAT Ta Re TTT: tel 


Adh. LXXVIII. Sl. 15-18.] weagftastsvara: 617. 


Sloka 14.—A womanin the company of her lover 
in privacy should not indulge in boorish talk (or decorate 
herself with rustic colours), not be unclean in body, not 
speak of unseemly parts of the body, nor mention other 
subjects; for mind is the birth-place of Love whose body 
was burnt by Hara. 

Ma WII ay UAedl WTTIAMATIATAT | 
GUTH Tagiqam asaga awd fgg 24il 

Stoka 15,—A woman who breathes in unison with 
her lover, is ready to make her arms a pillow for him, 
offers skilfully her breasts to him, has her hair finely 
scented, goes to sleep after he has fallen asleep and 
wakes up before him, has sincere and abiding love for 
him. 

On Cu 
qeaurar: wtastatar WaeHsT a a at aT | 
WaMAaAaadsianawasst TA ae TAA WEN 
UT aaqaat aealta walsal aaHTTATTT | 
WETTAT ACTUATE A Fahat Tsaticaar at veo! 
atari garg auiea aal aeIeT Rafat a ar arg 


Sisat a sitar nants gaicae wa Nc 
Slokas 16-18.—Those women who have a_ wicked 
nature, and who are impatient during coitus, ought to be 
shunned. Inauspicious are those whose blood is dark, blue, 
yellow, or slightly copper-red. A woman that is sleepy, | 
has too much blood and bile, has a dripping (burning) - 
organ, is of a rheumatic and phlegmatic constitution, 
gluttonous, sweaty, with deformed limbs, short-haired, 
and with (prematurely) grey hair; further,one whose 
muscles are flaccid, who hassa pot-belly and who pro- 
Td 78 


618 geeifteray [Adh. LXXVIII. Sh. to-8% 
duces indistinct sounds, besides those who in the €hap- 
teron the signs of women have been declared sinful: 
with none of the above women should a man play the 
act of Cupid. 


From the above remarks, it is quite clear that this is meant 
only for kings to follow. 


TIMMATAK TARaayATAIT aq | 
ratte Awala aq Reser ct ueau 
aseaqaamiaisa RN airada THY | 
TIVIATAAMTAAT Tat ANA MRell . 

Slokas 19-20.—The menstrual blood is sound if 
it is tinged like hare’s blood, or lac, and fades after wash- 
ing. (That is, fit for impregnation). Such blood not 
attended with noise and pain, and ceasing to flow after 


three days, will undoubtedly develop into an embryo 
after union with man. 


a @aaa ated att Mea aie: | 

AAAIASAT VAHANIAT NW 

POUMAITAa Ts BAA MFAAANA: | 

WMI eas a Ga BRAT Migs: UR. 

 Slokas 21-24.—A woman in!menses should not bathe, 
not wear wreaths of flowers, nor anoint her body. She 
should bathe on the fourth day according to the man- 
dates of the Sastras. She should use for her bath the 
herbs enumerated in the Chapter on ‘ Royal ablutions’ 
(Ch. 48) mixed with water, and the same hymn men-« 
tioned there will have to be used here too. 


. gag Re age Marg ara aaiea Haag | 
. gialan aso: ghaaa apezag Ru 


Adh. LXXVIII. SI. 24-26.] seaunfaantsvare: 619 


Sloka 23.—-They say that sexual union on even 
nights (after menses) procreates males, while on odd 
nights, females. On distant even nights, it leads to the 
birth of children who will be long-lived, handsome and 
happy. 

Probably the second half gives the author’s own opinion in 
which distant even nights are good for future issue. 


qarny gett ay ant warqaadan It 
TAUAANT AAS TyAgeay Uw 
Sloka 24.—A foetus situated in the right side of the 
womb will be a male; while one onthe left, a female. 
One situated on both the sides will be twins and one in 
the middle is to be understood to be a eunuch. 


Bearers waaay sx Tas A za: aad | 
qrafaararitnay BaegsteTaTg aT TETATTA 14H 


Sloka 25.—A man ought to have sexual union with 
his wife when the Kendras and the Trikona houses are 
occupied by benefics, when the Moon and the Lagna are 
conjoined with benefics, when malefics are posited in the 
3rd, 6th and 11th houses and when there are planetary 
combinations ensuring the birth of a male. 


For qaqa, vide I. aT. IV-11. 


a ‘magaatirat gacaaay gee: faa: aafag | 
HAUT <a Ts FT Tait saattahast a qa aWa_ 

— Bloka 26.—A man should on no account make 
raarks on his wife’s body with his nails and teeth during 
her .period of impregnation. Such a period lasts for 
siteen days, of which the first three nights are unfit 
for union, 


620 aveditararg [Adh. LXX IX. Sl. 1-4, 


These ideas are described at dene in works on Ayurveda 
such as HEF ETT. 


Thus ends the 78th Adhyaya on “the Union of Man and 
Woman.” 


J TUMAITINY 198i! Signs of Couches and Seats. 


TAA AIRS TUTTI Tay | 
tat Aardisa: TaqTATSTT TET LU 
Sloka 1.—Since this science dealing with the signs 
of couches and seats is useful for all persons at all times, 
especially for kings, I shal] now expound it. 


HIATT TACT AAT E MAT: | 
BIAATTRATT at HAMA > Yar: leit 


Sloka 2.—Trees recommended for the construction 
of beds and seats are Asana, Spandana, Sandal-tree 
Haridra, Deodar, Tinduka, Sal, Kasmari, Arjuna, Pad- 
maka, Saka and Sienna: 


TMaTeiaskarwsa aaeeHaasan | 
AUMAI ANIM AHAB ATS (AN 
mahal XT Wagaeiagaga Fa | 
HAIMA T Jal F Bavaratesgiaa: ell 


Slokas 3-4.—Inauspicious are those ‘trees that’ are 
thrown down by thunder-bolts, water, wind and ele- 
phants ; those in which bees and birds have taken up 
their abode ; those growing in sacred spots, burial grounds 
or roads ; those that are withered at the top, and those. 
that are entwined with creepers so also are thorny 
trees; those growing at the confluence of great river, 


Adh. LXXIX. SI]. 5-8.]  vataraff@aaiseara: 621 


or near temples and those that have fallen down in a 
westerly or southerly direction. 


nfaftaralataqaaaaaaagy softara: | 


Sarasa IHSNl AIHA AIBA: elt 

Sloka 5.—From the use of couches and seats 
constructed from forbidden trees ensue the ruin of the 
family, diseases, danger, loss, quarrels and all sorts of 
disasters. 


qaesa ae a Ts NTUcaeTATET | 
TAAL SAH: TATYS 77 1811 
Sloka 6.—Or, if the timber had been cut formerly, 
then it should be examined (if there be any signs of the 
forbidden variety) at the commencement of the work, 
Should a boy mount the timber, it will give sons and 
cattle. 


agqrAATTT STAT WATT | 
THAI 4 TEITEH UA TIT thsi 
Sloka 7.—It should be known as a good token, if, 
at the beginning of the work, one happens to see white 


flowers, a rutting elephant, curds, coloured rice, full pot, 
gems and other auspicious articles. 


 eeige Treagquaa Th WAT | 
WRST TUTT Aedt Val Hara Far ici 


Sloka 8.—A practical digit is the distance covered 
by eight husked barely grains touching one another. 
A great couch of kings* measuring one hundred digits is 
made for (ensuring) victory, 


622 geedfgarara [Adh. LXXIX. SI, 9-14, 


mata: fa gat areaelar Prezetat | 
AUAREATSUAUTA TAMA SAT 8M 


Sloka 9.—The couches of the prince royal, minister, 
commander-in-chief of the army and royal preceptor 
measure in order 90 digits, 84, 78, and 72 digits. 

aqadisetad feet Rando se: | 
AAAI? WAST AHEAAT: ULolt 

Sloka 10.—The width of a couch .prescribed by 
Viswakarman is ith less than half the length (2. e., zsths 
of the total length). The height of the legs including 
the swelling part (middle) and top is equal to a third of 
the length of the couch. 

eo 8 8 es 
a: aa: atiqeat qagt Apa @ saerar | 
HAAAHA WATUIAeTHANT AH 12 2A 
a: Raaiaara faiatsar agate a afew: | 


~ 


aera gat ATTA ABA nea 
g ON ~~ a as 
43 WTR: A GAag: AT ad aay | 
Sod Misa Ha: BIO Arachyay (12311 
Sears siaagy AParcagay | 
Ce wn ~ 
HUT Ts Agady yead aaa ue 
Slokas 11-14.—A cot constructed wholly of Sri- 
parni will bestow wealth; one of Asana, destroys diseases; 
one of the pith of ebony, gives money; one of Simsapa 
bestows all-round prosperity ; one of Sandalwood des- 
troys enemies and bestows religious merit, renown and 
ldng lite ; one of Padmaka gives long life, prosperity, 
learning and money; one of Sal tree or Saka gives 
happiness. A king, reposing on a‘cot made entirely of. 
sandalwood and covered with gold and decked with. 
wonperful gems, will be honoured even by the Gods, 


Adh. LXXI1X. Sl. 15-20.] qalareitferasiiseara: * 6ak 


HAT AAA at Aga Faw a TART | 

aq figia a caqieaat a aeaaa: e4N 

TALI I MSABl WEIL ATA TAH Bey li 

AST TAS AR algal aT altanaarat 28M 

C lon (oe os 

Was WAqUAd a Tas AT aka aeTHar | 

AAAUSSHTAGAA (Aas zig BUla TTT oll 

TALE TAA AIA WTETARHAL TWEE | 

HOI VAAMATHCKS Hala TAT cli 

Slokas 15-18.—-A couch made of Tinduki or Sim- 

supa with some other timber will not yield good results ; 
so too is one of Deodar or Asana with Sriparna. Sal 
and Saka on the one hand and Haridraka and Kadamba 
on the other, are good, whether used jointly or separately. 
A cot wholly made of Spandana or Amba tree is not aus- 
picious, since it destroys life; one of Asana coupled with 
other timber produces* immediately various troubles. 
It is beneficial to have the legs of Spandana tree for 
couches made of Amba, Spandana and Chandana. 
Couches and seats made of any fruit-tree will have’ 
favourable effect. 


maga: Tai MRAM ATA Air | 
Baisagraageat AMA UVM 
Sloka 19.—Elephant’s tusk is highly éomumiended. 
for use in the construction of couches, etc. in combina, 
tion with any of the above trees; so that evennne 
may be made with good ivory. | 
Raa Fortis usa Msey eas | 
area aya Rica Haq ze 


Bloka 20.—Cut off a length (from the bottom) equal 
to twice the circumference of the tusk at the bottom and 


use the remainder for purposes of embellishment. A 
little more of it will have to be cut off in the case of 


elephants haunting marshy places, and a little less in the 
case of those haunting mountainous tracts. 


AIITAMNATST ATAATTSAY | 
Be edeqnbasaqsaagarSares 1221 
TEMACAY FA AcqaAT WASTATHA: | 
Be I BeayaE wala Tae aenrfa: 2 
Met aararat wRlesearad Tateakya: | 
grua fafamntiaauaa a ot 220 
Hooranigayrgimasaaa (igahyeayq | 
TUR ANSIMAANT TAATH! VV 
ASIA HAY FATT Ta TH | 
ST sa GA TA Aad ATs 2 
Blokas 21-25.—When cutting the tusk, if figures 
resembling Bilwa trees, Vardhamana, umbre la, banner 


and chowries appear, sound health, victory, increase of 
wealth and happiness are to be expected. A figure simi- 
lar toa weapon gives victory; one like a spiral turning 
to the right, recovery of lost lands ; one like a clod, com- 
plete possession of a country conquered before; one’ like 
a woman, loss of wealth; one like a vase, birth of a son; 
one like a pot, acquisition of a treasure ; one like a rod, 
obstacle to a journey ; those like chameleons, monkeys 
and serpents, famine, disease, and oppression by a foe;. 
those like eagles, owls, crows and hawks, pestilence ; oné: 
like a noose or a truncated body, bodes the king’s death, 


Adh. LXXIX. Sl. 26-28.) qararefifaasiseara: 625 


If blood comes out from the cut, there will be calamity 
to the people ; ifthe cut be dark, grey, rough and bad- 
smelling, disaster is near. 
lo ~ 4 & 
Us aa quien fray gars aresa: | 
AYABTRST A TIAUT J AM BHT Ul 
Sloka 26.—A cut that is white, even, fine-smelling, 

and glossy leads to prosperity ; just as auspicious and in- 
auspicious cuts produce good and bad results, even so do 
the trees used for couches. 


SUT se TAIT AAMATATa: | 


ATASTHAMT ATG at YTAAAaTy Ul 

Sloka 27,—-In fitting up the frame of the couch, 
the tips of the beams should be laid in a direction from 
left to right ; so say the ancient seers. If they be laid 
contrariwise, or allturned to one direction, there would 
be danger from devils. 

git is the frame consisting of two short beams, one on the 
headside, and the other on the footside, and two others on the 
two sides. The side beams are fixed into the two other smaller 
beams, In doing so take the head side where the foot of the beam 
faces north and tip, the south, the foot of ths southern beam should 
be fixed into the tip of the first beam, and soon, This is called 
fafrongq, The tips of both the beams should not be put together. 


whaareraar wala & asa weaKeag | 


aieat a ofidasa agi: Baraaea Rc 

Sloka 28.—If one of the legs is put topsy-turvy, the 
owner will have one of his feet crippled ; If two, he can- 
not digest his food; and if three or four, he will have 
misery, death and captivity : 

Here ‘topsy-turvy ” is used in respect of the timber and not 


the leg as such. | 
«979 


626 —— seeafgararay [Adh, LXXIX, SI, 29-35. 


gitisaat ag gear qe aay carly | 
MS FTA FA Tea aaa: VU 
| SFAARITG TT Fa AEA: Bas way | 
TAAAUST: ATGHWBSTA AT Fa! Zollt 
Gay al Tika: Beat vise a Pes: | 
sqrarsoay Graadel WTA WA: 132i 
Slokas 29-31,—lf there is a hollow or a discoloured 
knot in the upper part of the leg, the owner will have 
cerebral disease. If there is such a knot in its put, he 
will have stomach trouble; if in the shank-like part be- 
low the pot, danger to his shanks; if in the support be- 
neath that, loss of wealth ; if in the hoof, trouble to the 


hoofed animals. Inauspicfous also is a knot occurring at 
a third of the length of the side-beams and cross-beams, 


fAcgzay Hsia GHtAaa 3 awaard FI 
HVRVAZ-TRAlG BUawoa_A: Ul 
Sloka 32.—The different kinds of blemishes (holes) 
in the wood may be summed up in the following list :— 
Nishkuta (cavity), Kolaksha (boar’s eye), Sukaranayana 
(hog’s eye), Vatsanabha (calf’s navel), Kalaka (dark 
spot) and Dhundhuka (cut dark spot). 
qziq Gat AeA agzaa a ge (Say | 
oa NS SF FT Riarayq 3 
A ons a on .y an 
amiaad Fad Raasaaqaeid F 
armad fa Tad TeATATASwAT 13Vll 
Beaasy ST yeyaltia again | 
qreaat ix aT AUT aT aE asl 


Adh, LXXIX. Sl. 36-39.] aatarattiaaaiseara: 627 


Slokas 33-35.—The blemish called Nishkuta (cavity) 
is like a pot, hollow inthe middle and narrow at the 
mouth ; the second, Kolaksha is blue and like a grain of 
black gram; the third, Sukaranayana, is uneven, dis- 
coloured and extending over one joint and a half; the 
fourth—Vatsanabha—is a spot running from left to right, 
broken and extending over one joint; the fifth, Kalaka, 
is a black spot ; and the sixth (43%) is also dark, but cut, 
A faulty spot having the same colour as the wood itself 
is not deemed so harmful. 


fI*geqsy TeqIAtTA RisAay Hedy: | 

TAMA WHUR TATAT TWaAAVANTT 131 

BoRyequasy Heag aa wae rq | 

ad AeaTyt AIT A AAT TE 1B 

Slokas 36-387.—The blemish eoing by the name of 

Nishkuta causes loss of wealth; Kolaksha, ruin of the 
family; Sukara, danger from weapons; Vatsanabha, 
danger from disease. The last two blemishes and a spot 


bored by insects are not auspicious. In general, timber 
full of knots is never good. 


Gagan sea agatha 3 qeaaTq | 
fafameaaagnt aafaeay aaarag Nici 
Wma at aa Gees als aT a: Wa | 
qaqeTen RHTea Fear uss 


Slokas 38-89.—A couch or seat made from one 
kind of timber is blessed; more blessed is the one made 
from two kinds of timber; one of three kinds leads to 
the prosperity of one’s children; one of four kinds, to 
wealth and foremost, renown, One made from five kinds 


628 geeaitararg [Adh, LXXX. SI]. 3-4. 


of timber causes the death of the person who sleeps on it ; 
and one of six, seven or eight kinds, the ruin of the 
family. 

Thus ends the 79th Adhyaya on “ Signs of Couches and Seats.’ 


Waqal ilcoll Examination Of Gems. 


Tad Yaa BA wala TIM AlaeayaAa | 
TATA Wied SF vealed asa: 2! 
Sloka 1.—A jewel endowed with good characteris- 


tics ensures good luck to kings ; and one with bad ones, 
disaster. Hence the connoisseurs should examine their 


fortune as connected with jewels. 
feqzaataatat aquiagea tarascishe | 


SE TTTATATATHTT TH TTT HRN 
_ Sloka 2,—The word gem is applied to elephants, 
horses, women and so on, on account of the excellence 
of their intrinsic merits ; but here are dealt with precioug 
stones, such as diamonds. 
Teall Toes aases sera STAT | 
SPAe SATA TETSU 
Sloka 3.—Gems, they say, were born of the bones 
‘of the demon Bala; while others state that they were 
born of sage Dadheechi; yet others there are who say 
that the wonderful variety of gems is caused by the cha-. 
racteristic qualities of the earth. 


 aBtegaleatnanacraeerserean: | 


, Sgdgenaosrsaftienteatvercan: nen 


4 


Adh. LXXX. Sl. 5-10] waitfaarsitseara: 629. 


AAPTRMATHITATAST AWTS: | 
TMAMSaaTTAARR IAAT UI ' 

Slokas 4-5.—The following are the gems :—Dia- 
mond, Sapphire, Emerald, Agate, Ruby, Blood-stone, . 
Beryl, Amethyst, Vimalaka, Royal gem (quartz ?), crys- 
tal, Moon-gem, Sauganidhika, Opal, Conch, Azure-stone, 
Topaz, Brahma-gem, Jyoteerasa, Sasyaka, Pearl and 
Coral. 

amaze fag fdisgqnad 4 rasa | 
arureaaras Hor aiaizasy TAT UE 
sya Raat age aSeTTaTE TT | 
ad qT eR Vas Tesy THAT N91! 

Slokas 6-7.—Diamonds got from the banks of the 
Vena river are of the purest kind ; those of Kosala, have 
the lustre of the Sirisha flower (2. e. whitish yellow) 
those of Surashtra, a reddish lustre; those. of Saurpara 
country are dark in colour; those of the Himalayas. 
slightly reddish ; those of Matanga country have the 
colour (grey) of Valla blossoms; those of Kalinga agg, 
yellowish, and those of Paundra, black (blue ?) 

Dex Tet Ys wea aTaASralad F | 
mqvlnretrarad agate ataearay leit 
UEC CINCI RCC UC TN RICEL © 
aReRaea satay F gagAT USI 
aaey 4 ATMA T REGIA ageey | | 
Bla: wit: aaitatracaeaTaita: yon 

Slokas 8-10.—A hexagonal white diamond is_presi- 
ded over by Indra; a dark one of the shape of a snake's 


630 qetditararg [Adh, LXXX. Sl. 11-14. 


mouth, by Yama ; one coloured like a plantain tree, and 
of any shape, by Vishnu; one coloured like a Karnikara 
flower and shaped like the female genital organ, by Varu. 
na; a triangular one of the colour of a tiger’s eye (bluish- 
red), by fire; one having the form of a barley corn and 
the hue of Asoka flower, by Vayu. Diamonds have three 
different sources, viz., rivers, mines and other places 
where gems are found. 

TH Va aga Usesar Aa faratary | 

ate dearai aamé weaasatray eH 

Sloka 11.—Red and yellow diamonds are auspicious 

or Kshatriyas; white ones, for Brahmins; those of the 
hue of Sirisha flower, for Vaisyas ; and those resembling 
swords in colour (dark), for Sudras. 

fraTITNEs TES atageed Iga | 

aaa & wa qed arta aq ez 

qesdardia Bramqaaiie gars | 

ag Talia: aie: aretRaa 23 

Slokas 12-13.—Eight seeds of white mustard make 

one rice-grain. The price of a diamond weighing twenty 
grains is two lakhs (Karsapanas); One weighing 18 
grains is worth a lakh and a half Karshas silver; one of 
16 grains 133,3334; one of 14 grains, one lakh; one of 
12 grains, 66,6662; one of ten grains 40,000; one of 
eight grains, 12,500; one of six grains, 8,000; one of 
four grains 2,000; one of two grains, 200 Karshas of 


silver. 
80 silver coins make one Pana. 20 Panas make one Karsha. 


pana. : 
| Saeentd sere act diag fray | 
. AeA Fat Rasta UgeH 


Adh. LXXX, SI). 15-18.) ssiftreasiseara: Fok) | 


Sloka 14.—A diamond is said to be beneficial to the 
owner ; it cannot be pierced by any other substance, is 
light, cleaves through water like a ray, is glossy and 
similar to lightning, fire or the rain-bow. 

The commentator interprets “azala az tfaaaq” as sinks in 
water and is full of rays: but acia generally means ‘ floats.’ 


aRITAAATATTHl Tate | 
fsauits araguraaiaia a gai esl 
Sloka 15.—Diamonds that show scratches like crow- 
feet, bees or hair, are mixed with coloured mineral sub- 
stances or gravel, have double facets, are burnt, dis- 
coloured, lustreless or perforated, are inauspicious. 
aia a qaqaqisamtafizarainaaaiane | 
adat Waar eargiaseat ene 24 
Sloka 16.—So also are those that are covered with 
bubbles, split at the points, flattened, or oblong like the 
Vasi fruit. The price of all such is one-eighth less than 
that above specified. 
aw a fabacie quaacaaa 
GalaaiaaaiAsatea asars | 
THenagcaraRad fad 4- 
Saad A Bat aaraaailaryz ell 
Sloka 17.—Some authorities opine that women 
wishing to beget sons should never wear diamonds; but 
(in our opinion) diamonds that are triangular, trigonal 
and like the coriander seed, or the buttocks, are product- 
ive of good results to ladies desiring male offspring. 


eaaltaasiitaaa aaaa TATETATT | 
| WUraMRA Td TART FETT UCI 


esa teeter [Adh, LXXX1. Sht-6. 


-Sloka 18.—A diamond with inauspicious characte- 
ristics causes the ruin of the wearer’s kith and kin, wealth 
and life ; whereas a good one destroys the enemies and 
danger from thunderbolt and poison; it increases the 
pleasures of kings as well. 

Thus ends the 80th Adhyaya on the “ Examination of Gems.” 


THISAIN 21) Signs of Pearls. 


RIAIIA SI_ BTA | 
THRs at Way a ghas wate ue 
Sloka 1.—Pearls are got from (1) elephants (2) ser- 
pents (3) pearl-oysters (4) conch-shells (5) clouds (6) 
bamboos (7) whales and (8) hogs; but the best pearls are 
those that are got from pearl-oysters. . 


faroaraianageaTTeTT: | 
ATTN TTHLAT LATHES UI 
Sloka 2.—There are eight sources of the best pearls? 
vis. (1) Simhalaka (2) Paraloka (3) Surashtra (4) the 
Tamraparni (5) Persia (6) the North country, (7) Pandya 
Vataka and (8) the Himalayas. 
agaera: Fava saa: AoraUs CYST | 
SqaIA WAMAATHT AAS: NFL 
SM: Mar Nar: TIA west eat 
a eget area aatldirary see Wen 
STATS BM DAISAAAITTI TWAT | 
aq wat cat qeehsaaraala faq 14 
fart Sout wy BAT Tatrasaq | 
PramshyeneaHsys ws WTS AT. 11H 


Adb. LXXXI. Sl. 7-12.]  qerettitrestiseara: 633 
Slokas 3-6.—-The pearls got from Ceylon are multi- 
shaped, glossy, swan-white and large; those from the 
Tamraparni are white with a slight red tinge and bright ; 
those from Paraloka are blackish, white or yellow, min- 
gled with gravel and uneven; those from Surashtra are 
neither too big, nor too small, and hued like butter ; those 
from Persia are brilliant, clear, heavy and very valuable ; 
those from the Himalayas are light, broken, hued like 
curds, larze and double-shaped; those from the North 
country are rough, black or white, light, of goodsize and 
brilliancy: and those from Pandya Vata are like the 
neem fruit, or coriander seed, trigonal and very :ninute, 
ATUFIAVTUA ATE TIKIT | 
ahtaisiad arenraiad aagad aaig /9l 
qhuazieagienqaia 7 Tgqzaaq | 
fyaassaery a Asa Hcl! 

Slokas 7-S—A pear] dark like the Atacee flower is 
presided over by Vishnu; one like the Moon, by Indra ; 
one having the hue of orpiment, by Varuua; a dark one, 
‘by Yama; one red like the seed of a ripe pomegranate 
or a Gunja, by Vayu; one having the brilliance of 
smokeless fire or the lustre of lotus, by Fire. 

&, a“, 
AhACTT TIGRE Waris AIAIIA_ | 
wlan Maia yea Ainyrqaa whi 
WIGHT AA SUATSVAANTT A | 
AS A Vala gard Hawaar away 1201) 
gaia TAA Vere HMw aalayer: | 
araihaal Gan aAaqet ss By 2 
YMA FeI WAITTH! YATES | 
" STRIAAMIS TAIT 112 Rit 
%.% 80. 


634 ett Raraa [Adh. LXXXI. Sl, 13-17, 


Slokas 9-12.—The price set down for a pearl of 
good lustre and quality, weighing four Mashakas is 5300 
Karshas silver. The prices for pearls weighing 3%, 3, 
24, 2and 13 Mashakas in order are 3200, 2000, 1300, 
800 and 353 K. Silver. A pearl weighing one Mashaka is 
worth 135 K; one weighing four Rettis is worth90 K ; 
one of 34 Rettis, 70 K; a good one of 3 Rettis, 50 silver 
pieces (Karshas); one of 2} Gunjas, 35 silver pieces. 

One Retti (Gunja Krishnala) = $ Mashaka. 

GUTTA AO AAS FRANTA TEAM | 
Aad aalsaal SHA TAT FI Fesy NAM 
qeqaa fadt Aafiera ays: aga | 
aeqaqaiasd Te ad faa aleaq een 
Raagaqed sarassa aged 4 | 

Ss TMA AT AUT TNTEH FST UI 
gate HassTa al aeTHiaelat | 


fatraqeaaa siqqqes aelaaay 184i 

Slokas 13-16.—The 10th part of a Pala is called 
one Dharana. If thirteen good pearls together weigh 
one Dharana, their price is fixed at 326 K. Silver. Six- 
teen pearls weighing so much are worth 200 K; twenty 
pearls, 170 K ; twenty-five pearls, 130 K; 30 pearls, 
70K; 40 pearls, 50K.; 60 or 55 pearls, 40 K.; 80 
pearls, 30 K.; 100 pearls, 25 K.; 200, 300, 400 and 
500 pearls weighing together one Dharana are worth 
sucessively 12, 6, 5 and 3 silver pieces, ° . 


Five Gunjas make one Masha; 16 Mashas make one Suvarna ; 
4 Suvarnas make one Pala. Soa Dharana™ 3 of a Suvarna. 


fretirarstal can: red TArcaTATATy | 
aa: Ta Fea agarong Ue 


Adh. LXXXI. Sl. 18-22.] wareftfaaatscara: 635 


' Sloka 17.—The term to denote a collection of 13 
pearls that together weigh one Dharana is Pikka; a col~ 
lection of 16 is known as Pichcha; those of 20, 25, 30, 
40, 55, and 80 and so forth are respectively Argha, 
Ardha, Ravaka, Siktha, Nigara, and Churna (or dust), 

CART A WITaAt THis Teay | 

qhaecqqeaud glagqurat qa: Brat UCI 

Smaradanaaiamay a agar | 

sania aaattaaa wearaadiayq 2S 

Slokas 18-19,—The above is the price fixed for the 

various collections of pearls of good quality, weighing 
one Dharana. The price of intermediate groups of 
pearls will have to be found out proportionately; but 
suitable reductions in the prices of inferior pearls are to 
be made as given below:—The price of pearls that are 
slightly black, white, yellowish or copper-hued or slightly 
uneven (rough), is that given above reduced by a third ; 


whereas that of utterly rough and yellow pearls is less by 
a sixth and a half respectively. 


duaagestat geawaegareaag | 

Y MaTITAa AeNsSHhesT ATA Rot 
aat Ro Traea gw Hea arzTaHlary | 
TET TAA TEAST? TATA: Ui 
AUAG Al A qT Fasdlg J saa: | 
GUITAR TEMATA Tar WATT ull 


Slokas 20-22,—It is said that pearls are produced in 
the heads and the places where the tusks meet, of the 
elephants of Airavata’s family at the Moon's conjunction 
with Pushya and Sravana synchronous with a Sunday ar 


636 © geeditaraa [Adh. LXXXI. Sl. 23-26. 


pearance SREP 


a Monday ; of the Bhadra (happy) elephants born daring 
the Sun’s Northern course, at an eclipse of the Sun of 
the Moon. These pearls are plentiful, large, brilliant 
and of various shapes. These are beyond any estimate 
and should not be perforated, being too brilliant. When 
worn by kings, they will prove highly sanctifying and 
bestow children, victory and good health. 
GUS TART FT IEAM TET | 
ast aeaarrd geewia agg FAI 
Sloka 23.—Very valuible and Justrous like the 
Moon is the pearl born of the root of the boar’s tusks ; 
the pearl got from whales resembies a fish’s eye, is large, 
purifying and of great value. 
TUNISIA WHINY HAART | 
ln ~ a eS ¢ = 
Rad fea wilzeaaserd aqaAyaT NVI 
Sloka 24,.—They say that pearl is produced in the 
clouds of the seventh layer of wind in the sky in the 
manner of hail-stones. It falls therefrom with the _ brilli- 
ance of lixhining and is taken away by the denizens of 
heaven. 
The 7 layers of wind are: Ald®, T4z:, 44z:, 3as:, (ae:, aftae: 
and qzaz:. 
TCKUGHESAL BATA TT TAMANT | 
Rar diwaaat walta gar HTT RYU 
aasaaey TIAA waa ar a az | 
aaa GalswMIasas TTARYAT URE 
Slokas 25-26.—The snakes of the lineage of Taksha. 
and Vasuki and those that move’ at will, have bright,. 
blue-tinged pearls on their hoods, If Indra suddenly, 


Adh. LXXXI. St. 27.30 ] qarsitfiastseara: 639° 


rains on a blessed spot of the earth and into a silver 
one may understand it to bea pearl coming from the 
vessel, snakes. 
aqara qaaed! qrafs aq Gar fraraala | 
wag aiiat saTHAT Faas = ull 
Sloka 27.—A pearl born of the snakes, worn by 
kings will prove invaluable to them, destroy their mis- 


fortune and enemies, enhance their reputation and bes- 
tow victory. 


Rien Pale fad a ays Haq | 
Veiga aud aa wits” Wt | Rel 
Sloku 28.—A pearl is to be known to have sprang 
from bamboo by its resembling camphor or crystal, and 


by its being flat and rough. The pearl born of conch 
shell is round, lustrous, beautiful and moon-like. 


Ta faagarmaTeyanAAeaagn carla | 
afagneaanag: ae a alee: veh 
Sloka 29.—The pearls got from conch-shells, whales, 
bamboos, elephants, boars, snakes and clouds cannot be 
easily recognised (should not be perforated ); and as 
they are of immense value, no price has been fixed upon 
them by the authorities 


was aalie qaqa garda aaaTTRTNT | 

waa RTAAl at Tidal gHITalAdltaaHacna lott 
Sloka 30.—All the above categories of pearls are. 

extremely valuable ; they bestow on kings, sons, wealth, 


popularity, renown and desired objects and dispel 
diseases and grief. 


638 | qeedftarara, [Adh. LXXXI. SI, 31-36, 


SUT saat qeqaslal ageay | 
ES ara AaassecaTds 1132! 


AAS 


MIATA atl Sqassezl aTlAtHq aT | 
ACERSITU TIATRSITA AIVSR! 1132 
saga TF YVSl ATA BiMasaTssieat | 
Geahtanan geawaaqTaR 1330 
WALATSHM TaSA TLRSH ATT | 
aataageal sat aaTASls NVI 
AATAM ATH ATTA TTT RAL | 
aIHANTET aA BWeHTA AAU 

UHaAsl AA WTS A TAAAITT TATA | 

aaa a mitra q aes Tes at yaa RSRUAGM 


Slokas 31-36.—A pearl-necklace composed of 1008 
strings and four cubits long, is used as an ornament for 
Gods and is termed “ Induchchanda”. Half the above 
(é.e , 504 strings and 2 cubits)!is termed ‘Vijayachchanda’, 
A necklace of 108 strings and 2 cubits long is called 
“ Hara”; one of 81, ‘‘ Devachchanda'’; one of 64, 
 Ardha Hara ''; one of 54, “ Rasmikalapa” ; one of 32, 
“ Guchcha ”; one of 20, ‘‘ Ardha Guchcha ”; one of 16, 
“ Manavaka ”; one of 12, “ Ardha Manavaka"’; one of 
8, ‘‘ Mandara”’; one of 5 strings, ‘‘ Haraphalaka”. A 
necklace of 27 pearls and of one cubit’s length is called 
“ Nakshatramala” (a cluster of stars); the same is 
called “Mani Sopana” if it has other gems or gold 
beads inserted ; it is called “ Chatukara’”’ (coaxer), when 
it has a central gem set in gold, An Ekavali (single 
string) containing any number of pearls, measures one 
cubit and is devoid of other gems ; but when it is adorned 


Adh. LXXXII1. Sl. 1-4.) -weftf&aaitseara: £639 


with a gem in the middle, it is designated as a “ Yashti’ 
(stick) by the examiners of ornaments. 


Thus ends the 8!st Adhyaya on “ Signs of Pearls’’. 


VAMTASANTY |ieli Signs of Rubies. 


ainfrangeteqentaea, Wanaeyla: | 


AKIRA AAUMASATPTTATTT: UN? 

SUATUIT: YI Aeqaqay saalatagi | 

THEHAT Taaed ataragy aTey Neil 

_ Blokas 1-2.—Rubies are born of sulphur, Kuruvinda 

and crystal. Those produced from sulphur show the lustre 
of bees, antimony, lily, rose-apple or Rasa (myrrh). 
Those that arise from Kuruvinda are grey, of pale lustre 
and mixed with mineral substances; those coming from 
crystal are lustrous, multi-coloured and pure. 


fara: vaged assisheny ge: ade | 

Haas aeyeago: Arata At 

Sloka 3.—Smooth, illuminating with rays, very 
pure, sparkling, heavy, of good shape, brilliant within 


and bright-red—such are the good qualities of these 
precious stones in general, 


SVU AAIIA SAAN: Aaa: Ben. | 
qfigi a aaign anual alta: lel 
Sloka 4.—Stones are defective, if they are impure, 
of dull lustre, full of saratches, mixed with mineral sub- 


’ stances, broken, ill-perforated, not attractive and mixed 
- with gravel. 


640 geeaftarma [Adh, LXXXIT $1. 5-11, 


warafansanl demrararan way | 
ee cA ON 
wala ait: fee qala aisata: a eae tet 
-Sloka 5.—They affirm that on the head of snakes 
there isa gem, hued lile a bee or peacock’s tail, and 
shining like the flame of alamp. Such a one isto be 
known as of inestimable value. 
aad fafa vasa aa 
aq vale RIANA BATT | 
us a aaa a4 za: 
TAQ AMIAUT TA ays Waray| Wet 
Sloka 6.—A king wearing such a snake.gem will 
never be subjected to the sufferings arising from poison 
and disease; Indra will always be pouring rain in his 
realm ; and by the power of the ycm, the king will ex- 
tirpate his enemies. 
HEU: SEMA AA: Gar 
eiare fanterieer aaa tis! 
AUG TT BURA Waaney | 
AUNT IA AAT Ferg ici 
. » 
ATVHAGLT TAA Bi | ATAAST | 
qrHECTAETIS eT SLAB TAT SN 
amore Tale FETA TY | 
AAMT AAT Ferg weala aay uot 
MYA AVES BeaqTy weyneaaamay | 
e ¢ 
fa qanget qalata: agitey 128i 
Stokas 7-11.—The price of a single ruby weighing 
a Pala (=4 Karshas) is, we are tapght, 26,000 silver 


Adh. LXXXIII. SI. 1.] saviftenitseara: 641 


pieces (7. e., Karsha panas); one of three Karshas is worth 
20,000 pieces silver ; one of half a Pala, 12,000 pieces sil- 
ver; one of one Karsha, 6,000 pieces silver; one of eight 
Retties, 3,000 pieces silver; one of four Retties, 1,000 
pieces silver; one of two Retties, 500 pieces silver. The 
price of rubies of intermediate weight must be calculated 
proportionally, and with due regard to their being of 
inferior or superior quality. A stone deficient in colour 
fetches half the usual price ; one lacking brilliance, an 
eighth part; one with few good and many bad qualities 
fetches ,'5th of the standard price. A stone somewhat 
dusky, with many scratches and few good features will 
fetch »3. Such is the price of rubies as stated by the 
ancient seers. 
Thus ends the 82nd Adhyaya on “ Signs of Rubies.” 


AHASANT 'l63ii Signs of Emeralds. 


URAIaHaiaigegaay IAT! 
aiiaarad amanda que gut ia 2 
Sloka 1.—An emerald of the hue of parrots, bam- 
boo-leaves, plantain tree (greyish-yellow) or Sirisha- 
blossom (whitish-yellow) and of good qualities is ex- 
tremely beneficial to every man when worn at ceremo- 
nies in honour of Gods and the Manes. 
Thus ends the 83rd Adhyaya on “ Signs of Emeralds.” 


alawanry vil Signs of Lamps. 


TATA HVAT: TEBlaMSeTyL A: 
Ras ard wala Rasaearafiedistt | 


q.a 8. 


642 qeediQararg [L XXXIV. 1-2., LXXXV, 1. 


fia: Wg Byala BS Asay TAA 
STBTUAAISAASTT ALT TAN Ut 


Sloka I.—A lamp, whose flame is turned leftwards, 
shows dull rays, sputters sparks, is of little bulk, goes out 
soon, although furnished with pure oil and wick, crackles, 
quivers, is diffused and gets extinguished without the 
agency of grasshoppers or wind. 


aig: aeaqiawadag sara atfaar- 
Praca ve: sehanaiqenate | 
sent fanaernt gfe aattad cera 
VI waNAwoanray sis agai lz 
Sloka 2.—A light of compact form, long-sized, 
quiet, brilliant, noiseless, beautiful, turned to the right, 
uf the lustre of beryl or gold, reveals immediate influx of 
wealth ; so does one that shines long and brilliant. The 
other symptoms are similar to those of fire (vide Adhyaya 
XLIII, Slokas 32, 33 and 35 supra.) and apply to this 
mutatis mutandis. 


Thus ends the 84th Adhyaya on “ the Signs of Lamps ”. 


erdHlgoan, ' cll Tokens of Tooth-Sticks. 


AMSAT: WsraHigia Taal a | 
HUllet METI TAT Al yal aeeay Bridal Ut 


Sloka 1.—Sticks for cleansing the teeth may be 
made from thousands of varieties of creepers, spreading 
plants, shrubs and trees, and their effects may be ex- 
pounded ; but in order not to indulge in much prolixity,- 
I shall only delineate those of favonrable consequences 


Adh. LXXXV. Sl. 2-5] tarsitfaaatsvara: 643 


ARAM A TeaTRB IIIa wy aaazaiy | 
TWAT aT Wisaiay aT AeAATH Bar eT aes UM 


Sloka 2.—One ought not to use the following tooth 
sticks: those that have not been tried so far; those 
that have leaves; those that have an. even number of 
joints; those that are split; those that are withered at 
the top ; and those that are without bark. 


yagatinwaradg stat ale: Barat gare: | 
afeatss ogi a Aa: gat aye aM: Pacaq Uz 
Sloka 3,—Vaikankata, Bilwa and Kasmari being 
used as tooth-sticks tend to Brahminical splendour ; the 
Kshema tree (milky tree?) bestows a good wife; the 
banyan tree, prosperity ; Arka, great brilliance ; Madhuka 
virtuous sons and popularity. 


prt is another reading for Ayo: 


Se: ANY yaar aI Gasaaie: aauitaa ara | 
WeAAAaid TAS Bal AsTleqsyati aha Vk 

Sloka 4.—Fortune is ensured by the use of Sirisha 
and Karanja; acquisition of abundant wealth wished 
for, by the Indian fig tree. By the use of the jasmine 
wood, man acquires honour and respect; and by the 
sacred ,tree (Aswattha) it is said, one comes to prominence, 


ANvayyIaiqeaiesqag|: Bert afaed | 

Rea Aereqywy ws AAs IWeas ga: BETTI 
Sloka 5.—Good health and long life may be ez- 

pected from Jujube and Brihati; increase of wealth (or 

lordship) from Khadira and Bilwa (or authority and _pro- 

fit from Khadira ,and Bilwa) ; desired objects from 


644 qmeatgarara, =[Adh. LXXXV. SI. 6-9, 


Atimuktaka (a kind of Jesamine); and the same from 
Kadamba. 


Aisa BA sqaaast aeaay mya | 
_. eat qaaieaga  sararai a evataa ara: 141 
'  Sleka 6.—From Nipa one may expect acquisition of 
wealth; from Karavira, eating of good food; from 
Bhandira tree, a sumptuous feast. Sami and Arjuna 


destroy one’s enemies; Syama too brings about the 
annihilation of one’s foes. 


MSsqTHy FT aia WT AATAUAT Wess | 

TS AUMG Aaa aia: Pragaaisasaegarisa:- hol | 
Sloka 7.—Dignity, they say, will result from the use 

of Sala and Aswakarna, as well as of Deodar and 

Vasaka. By using the twigs of Priyangu, Apamarga 

(e-ées5Glenr), Jambu and pomegranate, one becomes. the 

favourite of every body. 


SCSYS: MSYR Ta Wer BIA Gas era faqs | 
Aaaiteay A gasses: wet aay BAIT lilt 
Sloka 8.—One should after cherishing in the heart, 
any desire whatsoever for the coming year, use a good 
tooth-stick, sitting at ease, facing the north or the east 


without any resentment ; and then after washing - it, he 
should leave it in a clean place. 


aiaganiad WraeTay quaiaaaag sated aq | 
ayaRnasag wee fears a KOs asaAT 191 


Sloka 9.—Auspicious is a. tooth-stick that falls, 
when thrown away, towards the user and in a tranquil 
(unscorched) direction; it is especially good, if it .qccm 


Adh. LXXXVI. SI. 1-4.] vesftaasiseara: 645 


pies an elevated place. One contrary to the above is 
declared to be inauspicious ; whereas one that falls down 
after standing erect for awhile, brings sumptuous food. 


Thus ends the 85th Adhyaya on ‘* Tokens of Tooth-sticks ”’. 


wgeaq le&il Omens through Birds and Beasts. 


TFRYHUNIRIGSA AAT | 

HAE AE BINT ATWIST 7 2 
marred EBT ae wigeTaaA | 

MaAeAhs MS FW AIUIAIAUSTR! NI 
aaitt Ad wa ated MEd aT Aq! 

ana Sati aaa ATA: ZH 
alia Tyr THI ATGTAATT | 


Tease Ateat eat TagIAg vill 


Slokas 1-4.—For the delectation of his disciples has 
Varahamihira written this science, the source of super 
knowledge abridging all the existing works on this science 
ef Omens, having read the works of Rishabha who incor- 
porated in his work the teachings of Indra, Sukra, Briha- 
spati, Sage Kapisthala and Garuda, of Bhaguri, of 
Devala, of the blessed king Dravyavardhana, ruler of 
Avanti, and born of the family of great emperors who 
followed the work of Sage Bharadwaja, of the seven 
Seers, of Garga and other sages, of several authors on 
the subject of ‘ Journey’ and other works in Sanskrit 
and Prakrit. 


‘Who is this king Sri Dravyavardhana ? Was he a descend: 
sat of Harsha Vardhana? ‘Was he a Buddhist? Was Avanti 


646 qeeafgarara, [Adh. LX XXVI, Sl. 5-7. 


included in the Kingdom of Magadha? For, the Commentator 
says that Varahamihira was a Magadha Brahmana. 


alga is the adjectival form of WA=Omen. This wa is 
based upon the word wafa, a bird. This chapter should not be 
confounded with the one on “‘ Portents.”’ 


AUTH AHI BT Fat YATTAT | 
ATAIZ: We Magaidassayq (/4Il 
Sloka 5.—-During a man’s journey, an omen reveals 
the fruition of his deeds, good and bad, done in a pre 
vious birth. 


This shows that the omens are not superstitious beliefs. They 
indicate one’s belief in the rebirth of the soul and thus reveal 


effects of past deeds, good or bad. 
~*~ x ~ 
MATA A STAT AM ATANT : | 
bat he Pia! ° e 
VATIAAT By Ma: Tatagaar WGI 
Sloka 6-—Omens are of various kinds, as those 

through beings that are rural, wild, aquatic, terrestrial, 
heavenly, diurnal, nocturnal and diurnal-nocturnal. The 
sex of the creatures is to be determined from their cry, 
gait, look and speech. 

Rural beings are men, horses, elephants and dogs; wild 
onss, lions, tigers, boars, deer, etc.; aquatic ones, swans and the 
like ; terrestrial ones, dogs and the like, mangooses, serpents, etc. 
For the explanation of diurnal, etc.,c/. Chap. 88 infra. According 
to the Commentator when there is a doubt as to whether ¢a tertain 


bird crying is male, female or eunuch, it is to be guessed from the 
Sex of a person talking near by. 


WAUNMATMAeH Stes SET | 
AMISAMNTA VSTIHANaAl 1911 
Sloka 7.—Since it is very difficult to distinguish - 
their sex owing to the multiplicity of their genera arid the 


Adh. LXXXVI. SI. 8-11.] ‘waaitftaaiseara: 647 


absence of a fixed habitat, Sage Garga, the senior, has 
written the following two verses explaining their general 
characteristics. 


qdiaiaaagstan yyutan qaqa: | 

BeTraasar Tatas eatrwats ich 

TREBTUMNAT AAAs: | 

TamAgais: aisdseaqgany Sit 

Slokas 8-9.—“The male creatures have fleshy, high 

and large shoulders, broad necks, a fine breast, small but 
deep sound and great valour (or firm gait ?); whereas the 
female ones have slender breast, head and neck, small 
face and feet, little courage and harmonious and melodi- 
ous voice. Those that are possessed of characteristics 
different from these are eunuchs.”’ 


Eunuch will have masculine as well as feminine characte- 
ristics combined in them. 


TARGA BRAATITSIa | 
aaa aT TATA TA 18 oll 


Sloka 10.—The creatures that live in villages, fo. 
rests, etc., are to be understood only from conventional 
knowledge. Here I should like to delineate -in brief 
only those that are relevant to journeys. 


quaqleala 37 yey qa aileaa Zaaly | 
— a rar ae aienlararaaisthag 2 eu 
Sloka 11.—A man going on a journey ought to con- 
sider the omens, good or bad, as relating to his own 
person; in a marching army, they relate to the sove- 


reign; ina city, to the tutelary deity (or to the Mayor) ; 
jn an assembly, to the chieftain. When there are many 


648 geedfearary. (Adh, LXXXVI. SI. 12.’ 


* 


chieftains of the same rank in a concourse, they refer to 
one who is seniormost; by virtue of his birth, learning 
and age. | 


gamaacaig ce Ry auitay | 
AGATA WEIS WV 


Sloka 12.— For three hours after Sunrise the North- 
east is called Mukta Surya (7. e., one that has aban- 
doned the Sun), the East, Prapta-Surya (é.e, one that 
has attained the Sun) and the South-east, Eshyat Surya 
(one that is going to get the Sun); for the second watch 
of the day, the East, South-east and South respectively 
get those names; for the third watch, the South-east, 
South, and South-west ; for the fourth watch, South, South- 
west and West; for the first watch of the night, South- 
west, West and North-west; for the 2nd watch, West, 
North-west and North; for the third watch, North-west, 
North and North-east ; and for the fourth watch, North, 
North-east and East. The effects of omens in the res 
pective directions are as signified by their names given 
above, t. ¢., in the Mukta-Surya quarter, the effect of the 
omen is already spent up; in the next quarter, it is to be 
experienced the same day ; and in the next, it is impend- 
ing. The three quarters named above, vz?. Mukta, Prapta 
and Eshya (abondoned, prevailing and coming) are 
severally termed Angara (charcoal), Deepta (burning) and 
Dhumini (smoking), and the remaining quarters, tranquil. 


The commentator refutes the statement of some scholars whe 
hold that the East is Stwqaq or dim during the three hours made 
up of the last half watch of the night amd the first half-watch of. 
the day, and quotes Garga in support of his contention, 


WV, Bo~In the light of this view, wa have to make some 


Adh: LXXXVI. Sl. 13.]  awattfterstiseara: 6490. 
addtions in some previous chapters. We have to refer to this Sloka 
while commenting upon the term 218 occurring previously. 


acaanizat at ay sHreaaniega | 
qhasiealaizd aqaa zargraq Wei 


Sloka 13 —---Omens occurring in the 5th directions 
from these three—Charcoa], Burning and Smoking-augur 
well equally for the past, present and future. The good 
or bad effects of omens occurring in the remaining two 
quarters will have to be judged from their proximity to 
the particular Tranquil quarter. 


To make this cleat :—It has been already stated that 3 quar- 
ters at a time get the appellations of Charcoal, Burning and Smok- 
ing and that the remaining 5, of Tranquil. Here the author speaks 
of the 5th quarter counted from any one of these three. If we: 
take the first triad N. E., Eand S. E. (Charcoal, Burning and 
Smoking) we get as the 5th ones to these: S. W., W andN. W, 
respectively. Similarly in the case of other triads. So of these 
5 Tranquil quarters, only one is very beneficial to the particular 
member of the triad; ¢. ¢., a good omen in the 5th quarter from 
“Charcoal ’ indicates some good thing that has already occurred ; 
from the ‘Burning’, a good thing that takes place the same day; 
and from the ‘Smoking’ a good thing that is going to take place 
in the near future. Similarly a bad omen in these indicates only 
very slight harm. Suppose an omen takes place not in the 5th: 
quarter from any member of the triad, but one place this side or 
that; then we will have to see to which of the Tranquil quarters 
it is proximate and then predict the results; e.g., let us take the 
* Burning’ direction, Suppose an evil omen occurs not in the 5th 
from this, but near the 5th from ‘Charcoal’; then the bad 
effect which had been already felt was slight; similarly, if a good 
omen takes place, there was some good effect: but if there is a 
good omen near the 5th ffom. ‘Smoking ', the evil effect in the 
‘future will be moderate ; if it is a bad one, the same in the future 
will be very great. 

q.8 82. 


650 gear [Adh, LXXXVI. SL 14.15 


Snishdadmnnemmnetontununtanadane anuieonnt 


AAT AAA UAT: | 
MAGAGITNAT WAIMHS Jaz UV 


Sloka 14.—Omens occurring near by and at a lower 
level bear fruit (good or bad) immediately ; whereas those 
far off and at a higher place, in distant future. Moreover 
the predictions will have to be made suitably after a 
consideration of the growing or diminishing nature of the 
place on which the omen is perched. 

Suppose a bad omen i« seen on a growing thing (say, a tree); 
then the malefic effect will not he exces-ive; similarly, if there is 
a good one there, the berefiiral effect will be very great and in- 
creasing gradually. Suppose there 1. a bad omen ina dying tree; 
the bad effects will be extreme; so also a goad one there will pro- 
duce very little gecod effect Parasara gives another set 

jof af and wld objects as cinens. 


AMATSTMa Hea TAT | 
Geaia aawraaaiaated: 241i 


Slokas 15,—An omen is said to be blasted by a 
divine agency when it occurs in a malefic Muhurta, lunar 
day and lunar mansion, when the wind blows foul and 
the Sun is in opposition ; whcreas it is blasted by action, 
when it has untoward gait, position, disposition, 
sound and movements of limbs. In both the sets, the 
power of each element is greater than its predecessor. 


In the Muhurtas of dreadful and cruel asterisms an omen jg 
‘blasted’; so too in the 4th, 6th, Sth, 9th and 14th lunar days; in the 
stars Mula, Jyeshta, Aslesha, Ardra ,Bharani, Visakha, Magha, 
Krittika and Purvapbalguni (and other Parvas); during the wind 
which is fierce, rough, strong and unfavourable; in a direction gp. 
posite the Sun, and in one where there® is such a wind ag given 
above. Thus there are five varieties of Blasting an omen through 
a divine agency. There are five other varieties called ° Blasting of 


Adh. LXXXVI. SI. 16-18.] eesifaaats<ara: 651 


Action.’ When an omen runs against lightning, comet. the Sun or 
wind, it is Blasted by ‘Gait ;’ when it is stationed in a cut, broken, 
crooked, smeared ifm7a1, dilapidated or withered, or dirty 
support, it is, by ‘position;’ an omen in the form of a lifeless or 
unconscious or partially conscious creature, is blasted in ‘feelings 
or life’; when it utters a word whose letters are ill-pronounced and 
lengthened, the voice being feeble and broken, it is called ‘blasted 
in voice : when a bird flaps its wings, shakes its beak, is about to 
fall down, cries hoarse and pecks at trees, it is ‘blasted by move- 
ment. (The commentator quotes Rishiputra who in his turn 
quotes Lord Indra). 


Ae ~ 
qUIa WUashy AeaTTHTTTA: | 
aia Tigt AT asaaa: Baas Wet 
Sloka 16 —In the same manner there are ten varie- 
ties of omens that are ‘Tranquil’. One eating grass and 
fruits is a ‘Tranquil’ or benefic omen, while one eating 
meat and ordurc is ‘blasted’ (maletic). One eating cooked 
food is supposed to be of a mixed kind, 7 e. ‘Tranquil 
cum blasted,” 
e = \ e 
SFANTAIAALAAATAAA A: | 
AG APLAATKSGEITAT FUL 
Sloka 17.—Most excellent are the omens that are 
situated in mansions, temples (or palaces), auspicious 
abodes (such as are occupied by Gods, Brahmins and 
cows). and places that please the heart (by cool shade 
and fine carpet of grass), as well as those perched on 


trees that are laden with sweet fruits, that are milky, 
that have flowers and fruits. | 


aad fittaean afeat alae: | 
| RMaelgen Far Visa: eqdahaeq ue 


Sloka 18,—Creatures that roam by day are strong 


652 qeraftarama (Adh. LXXXVI. SI. 19-23, 


during day time on mountains (elevated places); like- 
wise those that roam by night are strong on water at 
night time. Among hermaphrodite, female and male 
ones, each is stronger than its predecessor.. 
TTA SAMASMaTaUieaa: | 
ATANATSMNA Aas fsaan 2S 
Sloka 19.—Strong are creatures (omens) that pos- 
sess superior speed, species, strength, position, jolly mood, 
courage (fearlessness) and voice, and are in their respec- 
tive haunts, whereas those that are deficient in the above 
things are weak. 
grpeatitieay Ritaasgefsat: | 
alsa: faeaiza Hei FT Tras URoll 
Sloka 20.—The cock, elephant, FPirili (a bird), 
peacock, Vanjula, musk-rat (or civet cat?), Simbha- 
nada and Kutapuri are strong in the East. 
PISRGREUARIHRBAARSAS | 
HUTA THA WET? WAL 
Sioka 21.—The jackal, owl, Harita, crow, ruddy 
goose, bear, ichneumon, dove, as well as weeping, crying 
and cruel expressions are strong in the South. 
TATA AMIAAAR IAT | 
Remearaatiaears TAT UR 


Sloka 22.—The cow,’ hare, Krauncha, hair-eater 
(jackal ?), swan, osprey, Kapinjala, cat, as well as 
festivities, instrumental music, singing and laughter are 
strong in the West. 


TATAFHAABIHABT | 
cope, SARTRE AAT ITF UR 


Adh. LXXXVI. SI. 24-27.] vealtfaaatscara: 653 


Sloka 23.—The wood-pecker, deer, rat, antelope, 
horse or donkey, cuckoo, blue jay, porcupine, as well as 
the sound of chanting Vedic hymns, of bells and of conch 
shells, are strong in the North. 


T MESO Tal AeA Weqadiaa: | 

Raa a Vaal a a away ar uel 
Sloka 24,— Rural creatures should not be taken into 
consideration when they are found in forests, nor the 
wild ones, in villages. So too, a diurnal creature should 


not be considered when it is found at night and viee 
versa. 


SeatisareA: BIAavaeyn: | 
MIMeAa AA A TA THAT: BAT URI 
Sloka 25.—Omens that are in pair, sickly, fright- 


ened, anxious for fight or meat, separated by a river and 
intoxicated (owing to the season) should never be taken 
into consideration. 

URAATTSA: SHREW: TT: | 

Prman: Pt Tat Tara THATBS RGU 

Sloka 26.—The Rohita deer, horse, goat, donkey, 

deer, camel, antelope and hare are to be known as of no 
consequence in the winter season (Magha and Phalguna 


months); so also are the crow and the cuckoo in the 
vernal season. 


TT ATI TAs THITTHTA: | 
AISA TAT TTT ERAATTAT Ml 


Sloka 27.—The bgar, dog, wolf and the like should 
-not be considered in the month of Bhadrapada; likewise 
the swan, cow and Krauncha in autumn (Aswina and 


554 geegarary [Adh. LXXXVI. Sl. 28-36, 


Kartika) ; and the elephant and the Chataka bird in the 
month of Sravana. 


SaraTTATA ART: alqeaar: | 
Sued Frenar Fal gay at arawn: uci 


Sloka 28.-—Tigers, bears, monkeys, leopards, buffa- 
loes, burrow-dwellers (mongoose and the like) and all 
young animals are of no consequence in Hemanta (Mar- 
gasira and Pushya) ; but boys do influence. 

Sage Parasara enumerates the seasons in which different ani- 
mals yet intoxicated owinz to their sexuil craving :~In the vernal 
season, the cuckoos, peacocks, parrots, frogs, crows, cocks, cranes, 
doves, and so on get intoxicated; in the monsoon, the bees, pea- 
cocks, cuckoos, cranes, Ohatakas, S :rangas, etc; in autumn, the 
Chakoras, Kadambas, mynas, parrots, Chataka:, swans, ruddy 
geese, cranes, ocspreys, bees, etc, > in Flemonta and Sisira, the val- 
tures, ospreys, Kraun: has, swans, eic. Among beasts the jackals, 
hares, foxes, Chamara deer, monkeys, cat}, mongovses, elephants, 
yalks, lions, tigers, tortoises, boirs, etc., have it in Greeshma; 
the antelopes, elephants, bulls. etc. im the monsoon; the bulls, 
bucks, buffaloes, yalks, Chamara, ctc. in autumn; cows, yalks, 
bulls, etc. in Hemanta and Sssira, 


wegaaieaaey Hay saw: | 
MAA AMA AAT WATT UWE 
Sloka 29.—Divide the space between the East and 
the South-east into three equal parts so as to have three 
points in between these two extremities, and assign them 
from left to right in order to Kosadhyaksha (lord of the 


exchequer), Analajeevi (those that live by the fire, gold- 
smiths, etc.), and Tapasas (Hermits). 


¢ 


ss feat fgiarer ai aeariertacdt | | | 
toy SAMY aragTadaaTaT 11361) : 


Adh. LXXXVI. SI. 31-33) sedirfaantsvara: 655: 


Sloka 80.—The three parts between the South-east 
and the South are occupied by Silpin (Artisan or artist), 
Bhikshu (a religious mendicant), and Nagna Stri (a nude 
woman) ; and those between the South and the South- 
west, by Matanpa (elephant or a Pariah), Gopa (cowherd) 
and Dharmika (nan engaged in righteous deeds). 


Sadarediney WATAAERT | 
MOSH: Waal al assay 112321 
Sloka 81 —The three parts between the South-west 
and the West are assigned to Pramada (an intoxicated 
young woman), Suti (confinement or child birth) and 
Taskara (a thief); and those between the West and the 


North-west, to Saundika (toddy-wender), Sakuni (fowler) 
and Himsra (murderous fellow). 


AIMAATIANAgEETAT I | 


VAVNAAUHA ASR W AT UF 
Sloka 32.— The parts between the North-west and 
North are occupied by Vishaghataka (one who murders 
by poison or removes the effect of poison), Goswami 
(owner of cattle), and Kuhakajna (a sorcerer) ; and those 
between the North and North-east by Dhanavan (wealthy 
person), Eekshanika (astrologer, diviner) and Malakara 
(a florist). 
x = (a ba 
AT TATRAT Isat Vay Tas | 
aiataca war: ty qaiedy: agar: uz 
Sloka 83.—The parts between the North-west and 
the East are occupied by Vaishnava (a devotee of Lord 
Vishnu) Charaka (a spy), and Aswarakshaka (a groom), 
In this manner, there afe altogether 32 divisions enume< 


rated including the eight quarters beginning with the 
East, . 


656 geedtgaraty = (Adh. LXXXVI. SI. 34-38, 


| UST HAT aT a Tae et ae sr: | 
Tae Tale: aaraaaeagq uae 

Sloka 34.—The eight quarters beginning with the 
East are owned by the King, Prince, Commander of the 
army, envoy, merchant, spy, Brahmin and manager of 
the Elephant yard respectively. Similarly, the four quar- 
ters East, South, West and North belong to the Ksha: 
triyas, Vaisyas, Sudras and Brahmins in order. 


WeSARAA ANT iy zat saawra: | 
AU Teal aeaAesia aaa: Ue4l 


Sloka 35.—If an omen (bird or beast) stands in a 
particular division of the quarters and cries, when a per- 
son is standing still or is going on a journey, it should be 
declared that he will meet the individual occupying that 
division. 

For example, an omen cccurring in the first point between 
East and South-east, he will meet the lord of the Exchequer. 


PaAaalaaTeTA ATT | 
Gal ALS YA MeaVAHaar wei 
Sloka 86.— Sounds that arc broken, harsh, piteous, 
distressed, rough, feeble or gruff—are unfavourable, 
whereas those that are serenc, merry or natural are good. 
The commentator interprets 2Il*d as one produced in a Tran- 
quil ’ quarter, which is not quite appropiate. 


far Sarat wet arg: yor gasifier | 
ME WIS T TAMAR TAA: | Bol! 
‘ Sloka 81.—The jackal,, Syama, Rala, Chuchchu 
(@ kind of rat, probably rabbit), ichneumon, lizard, sow, 
cuckoo and those that have male names are favourable, 
when they are on the left side of a traveller. ! 


Adh. LXXXVI, SI. °38-41.] eesftfaaisvara; = = 657 


qlasg weAER AMET | 

Arantasitcaigngesaay IAT UR 

Sloka 38,—Birds or beasts that have female names, 
Bhasa, Bhashaka (dog ?), monkey, Srikarna, Dhikkara 
(a kind of deer), vulture, peacock, Srikantha, Pippika» 
Ruru deer and hawk are beneficial to the right of a 


traveller. 
a 


SASH cag asNiaawergqa saat: | 
a qaqa: Faq Mlazear We: Tar 3h! 
Sloka 39.—The sounds of intoxicated beings (?), 
clapping, Vedic benediction, songs, conch shells, water, 
instrumental music and Vedic chanting are auspicious to 
the left of 1a traveller. All other kinds of auspicious 
‘sounds are favourable on the right side, 


MA ASAITA | WeITaHa Iraat: | 
TEAATAAT ANT BIA ATT Rar volt 
Sloka 40.—The Madhyama (a) and Shadja (a) 
notes as well as Gandhara (a) are auspicious ; but Shadja, 
;Madhyama, Gandhara and Rishabha (rt) notes are prac- 
tically beneficial for a journey. | 


'. . The Gandhara note is sung only by the Gods. The notes 
Other than those mentioned above are not commendable. 


VITALLY ANZIAIATST: | 


QT AFSAMN F AS WIgisMa? [V2 
Sloka 41.—The Bharadwaja, goat and peacock as 
_well.as the mongoose and Chasha bring good luck through 
their cries, the mention of their names, and their sight ; 


| whereas the sight. of a blood-sucker in front is of harmful 
effect. . 
%.% 83, 


658 © —sygeeiftareret [Adh, LXXXVI, SI. 42-45, 


¥ 


MHA TIRSaatal Vad ZAF | 
Bi TIA Ae gals aTATAAT: we 
Sloka 42.—The mention of the names of the Jahaka 
(leech ?), serpent, hare, boar and the big lizard is favour- 
able, while their sight and cry are not good; but it is 
the reverse, in the case of the monkey and the bear. 


ms 


Their cry and sight are good, but not the mention of their 
names. 


ASA AAT AA AA AaHawes4ns | 
AT TAHH TAL WYCTETTRT: VA 
Sloka 48.—An odd number of deer, mongooses or 
birds moving from left to right of a traveller is commend- 
able, whereas the Chasha and mongoose are good in the 
afternoon, when they move from right to left of a tra. 
veller in the opinion of Sage Bhrigu. 
The jackal and the dug are good, if they move from left to 
right in the fore-noon. 
rT Reqd a kei ag alae: | 
ACIS; AS TA TT Aasaa: levi 
Sloka 44.—The Chikkara (jackal ?), Kutapuri and 
Pirili (bird) are favourable in day-time when they move 
from left to right; whereas tusked animals, and purcu- 
pines, mongooses and the like are always commendable 
when they move from right to left. 


wy ena aeat wana a aieyat | 

PETRI TACSMAAATATS (all, 
Sloka 45.—The horse and any white object are 
“very good in the east; a dead body and flesh, in the 
South; a virgin and’ curd, in the West; a cow, a Brahmin 
and a pious man, in the North. 


Adh. LXXXVI. Sl. VI. SI. 46-49-] qezitftasiscara: 659 


ASAT arate qigua Tan awa ad aateq | 
qara gat 2a aaad anata dengan 


AMSTAUTT ASC ABATAl TAINAR | 
TAUTAAVS J ABAASATS VSM 


Sloka 46.—Hunters with nets and hounds are not 
desirable in the East; (men armed with) weapons and 
butchers in the South ; wine and eunuch in the West; 
a wicked fellow, a seat anda plough in the North. 

areevastt a GM MH WAST asi TAlyzedt | 

qepauamrafy Gargiaadiias: we des 

From the quotation, it is quite clear that the author means 


not mere J etc., but weapon-holders, men holding wine, carry- 
ing seats and ploughs. 


SAARATST WAT ALA | 
TWASIATA MEAN MAINT TWAT lvl 
Sloka 47.—In doings, meetings, wars, entering (a 
new house, etc.) and searching for a lost article, the re- 
verse of what has been laid down for journeys is to be 


taken. And the following are the special rules pertain- 
ing thereto. 
ALAM SAAA WAZ TSHAANA TA TACT GAY j 
wraqagiarMar gag zarta— 


If an omen is good to the right for a journey, then for doing 
Bome tvork, meeting some personage, beginning a battle, entering 
a new house, etc., it is good to the left. What is good to the 
East there is good in the West here, and so on. 


(tar WaATAMIA: SHBSATATS |] 

AGI ATA AT WIsSYogT_rT: Vell 
GY TIA ATRAB AST: | 

aa ug Agden ara aay Mary uesit 


660 _ geedfcarara, [Adh. LXXX'VI. SI. 50-53. 


Slokas 48 49.—The Ruru deer, antelope and mon- 
key during day are. to be treated as.for a journey ' 
similarly are to be treated the Chasha, Vanjula and cock 
inthe fore-noon. In the latter half of the night, the 
Naptrika, ow! and Pingala are to be considered as for a 
journey, In bevies of ladies, all the above birds and 


beasts should be taken in the reverse order both for jour- 
ney and —_ etc. 


qa ME: WATT AATTT | 
RAAT aiat mame ell 
| area eat a | aATTEAT | 


Slokas 50-504.—For an interview of the Sovereign, 
and also for the entering of the royal palace, ‘the omen$ 
are to be considered just us during a journey. As for 
climbing mountains, entering forests and bathing in 
(crossing) rivers, those that are auspicious to the left and 


right for a journey are favourable in front and behind 
MeDeCuyely. 


..., PRAT Fara ata: aieraeaa Wag 

aaa TX AMAT WAKAsTAAT | a 

AHA WHABASAdaMAgTs WA 

Slokas 51-52—If during a journey there be two 
omens called afta which are blasted by action on both 
sides of a person, there would be the ruin of the tra- 
“veller. The same two omens situated in their respective 
quarters (right and left) and having pleasant cry and 
movements are called “‘ Omen gates”’ and lead to the 
acquisition of wealth. 


fg agaanitesgare: fal 
aentearaia: PE THCTUEIE Pa REEL 


} 


Adh. LXXXVI. SI. 54-57.] qweitftracitseare: 663 


' a red 


Sloka 53.—Some hold that an “ omén gate” is 
caused by birds or beasts of the same spécies, standing 
on both sides of a traveller and having “ tranquil : move- 
ments and cries. 


By ‘ Tranquil’ is meant the opposite of ‘ blasted’ referréd to 
in Sloka 15, supra in alate 


Praia wae THT aaa 
AISA TAMA FT ASTAT: U4 
Sloka 54 —When one omen speaks favourably and 
another contrariwise, ‘the mutual contradiction’ that :is 


engendered is harmful to a traveller,and the stronger of 
the two is to be adopted. 


Ta TATA eat GH arene wag | 
. aaa fatgaras wae ater wai 


Sloka 55.— Should an omen become at first favoura- 
ble for an ingress and then for a journey, it would be an 
indication of the easy accomplishment of the traveller’s 
object, while the reverse is to be taken.in the case of an 
ingress. 


If the omen indicates success at first for a journey and for an 
ingress, then it is good for the latter. 


mast ga qa wu ens aq 
UE WANG THe TTAT TT YAH 


Sloka 56.—If one and the same omen tells success 
of a journey and then forbids it, it is an indication of the 
traveller's death at the hands of his enemy, of an armed 
feud, or of disease. | 


TATA qeat aiat waMaea 1 
ST ABA AG TTMRIKE (4H 


v3 


662 =» qyreifRerery [Adh, LXXXVI- SI. 58.61. 


Stoka 57.—Omens that being situate in a ‘Burning’ 
quarter move from right to left, presage peril. An omen 
ina‘ burning’ direction at the commencement of an 
undertaking likewise reveals danger to it in the middle of 
the year. 


Afiazasaerraer igr aA | 
GATTTAREHAT WAIST: UCI 
Sloka 58.—Omens that are ‘ blasted’ by a lunar day, 
wind, the Sun, lunar mansion, position and movements, 
are respectively dangerous to wealth, army, strength, 
limb, desired object (or beloved person) and work. 


Hiqaeaaaay as wale awaig | 
SMM: Aecqagign TRAIT: 4S 
Sloka 59,—Omens situate in the ‘ Burning’ direc- 
tion during peals of thunder foretell danger from wind; 
while during the two twilights, they indicate peril arising 
from weapons. 


The commentator interprets the compound saaeafrilty as 
blasted by peals of thunder.’ 


PrieHTETST BeTITTTINII: | 
PLRBGAMM ROSANA: MG oll 
amate wa ait fararreqeqaiaan | | 
CA . 
GACT TGA Aialz Beat ATI F Ng 
Slokas 60-61.—Omens stationed on funeral pyres, 
hair, or skulls (or potsherds) bring about death, imprison- 
ment or murder respectively ; those on thorns, firewood 
or ashes, quarrel, weariness or grief respectively; those 
that are ‘blasted’ and stationed on hollow objects of 
stones, failure of an undertaking or danger respectively ; 


Adh. LXXXVI, Sl. 62-66) vetitraaarsena: 663 


but if they are ‘tranquil’, their evil effects will be 
negligible, 
cafaterataat gat Freterercantton 
VANTTT AMAT TAI TaPATIAAT NER 
Sloka 62.—Omens that pass excreta or eat their 


food should be understood to cause the failure or fulfil- 
ment of their undertakings respectively. If one goes 


away after crying from its place, it indicates a journey 3 
if it comes to its place crying, some-body’s arrival. 
HIE BY aaa ae | 
TAMA BL HAT ATT TA TH UGA 
Sloka 63.~~Omens that have a ‘ blasted’ voice and 


position cause in order quarrel and battle; while those 
that after crying aloud produce a low sound, cause trouble. 


CHAT SY AAs AAT ATT ATTH | 
TATACAIM ALT T AAaATIT VII 
Sloka 64.—If ‘blasted’ omen stands crying in the 
same place (for a whole day), the village will be des- 


troyed in a week ; the city, in two months ; and the King, 
in a year. 


ai giegnalts aaa aaa: | 
Siqranrsieagaiatatsan Ngai 


Sloka 65.—All omens except snakes, rats, cats and 
fishes, eating the meat of their own species, cause famine. 


Similarly creatures mating those ofa different class produce 
the same effect. 


_ WS Hyd TIANA: | 
.. SeAT THOTT TMA gay NSA 


664 guniferara § [Adh, LXXXVI. SI. 67-69. 


i “Sloka 66.—Creatares mating members'of another 
species bring about the ruin of the country, exception 
being given to the birth of a mule, and to the sexual 
union of human beings of different classes. 


. The commentator tells us a horrible thing that there are men 
having sexual union with mares. 


WATT Ky _aigignaeifas.: | 


AUG AAS TITAS: TKAC)| 
Sloka 67.—If an omen passes by a person’s feet, 
thighs or head, he will suffer from imprisonment, hit or 
danger respectiveiy ; if it is found to eat tender grass, 
drink water, eat meat or cooked food, there will be in 
érder trouble, rain, wound or imprisonment, 
_ The commentator construes 02 as ‘ meeting a relative.’ 
, A A a. 
BUIGIGSA AWATTATH: | 
o “ a x A 
ARIST CUITSAITA Cg TANT | Ril 
Sloka 68.—If an omen is standing in any of the 
‘eight quarters ‘beginning with the ‘ Burning’, men will 
meet in order cruel, hut-tempered, sinful and wicked per- 
‘sons, ministers, kings, preachers'and old men. 
Bhattctpala gives another interpretation:—in the four direc. 
‘ tions, viz, Burning, Smoking, Tranquil and Charcoal, meeting 
with cruel persons, those who are corrupted by some fell sins, 


historians of great ancient kings and antiquated men respectively. 
‘He says that this interpretation is better. 


SRSA Taaty Bq aRsaarral wag | 
vt leary Raasrat areal creas (G0 
Sloka 69.—If an omen be strong and accompa- 


nied by some substance, there would be the atrival of a 
person with something in his hand. If the omen be 


Adh. LXXXVI. SI. 70-72.]  vesfiftaditsvara: 663 


lustrous and looking down, though auspicious, the person 
arriving would be a perpetrator of heinous crimes. 


Another meaning for the 2nd half :—~If the omen be lustrous, 
the person arriving would be one of a peaceful temperament; if 
it looks down, he will be a doer of heinous crimes, 


fafener: agai aia aaaargaiaa | 
faa: ARIST We TeaMVSsraTTM Asa: W90t 


Sloka 70.—If the cry of an omen stationed in a 
* Burning’ corner be followed by another to its left, it 
indicates a man’s marital alliance with a woman of the 
type indicated by that direction. 


This idea may be stretched to the case of a woman also. 
aeas gaadiga (eat AAT! | 
aUMAABI AT TWIFASTT Io 
Sloka 71.—The cry of an omen standing in a ‘Tran- 
quil’ quarter being followed by another stationed in a 
‘ Burning’ one that is fifth from the ‘ Tranquil’ quarter, 
bestows victory, or indicates the arrival of the person 
assigned to that quarter. If it be otherwise, (one cry in 
a ‘ burning’ quarter followed by another in a ‘ tranquil’ 
quarter fifth from it), troubles will arise. 

Another meaning is possible -—An omen standing ina ‘ tran- 
quil’ quarter and crying along with another in anothor ‘ tranquil’ 
quarter which happens to be the fifth from the ‘ Burning ’ 
quartef“at the time, etc. In this case T1794 is to be interpreted 
as aid: wiedqdaia—one staying in a ‘Burning’ quarter crying 
with another in another quarter which is fifth from one of the 
‘Tranquil’ quarters. 


TAASITA AST TE BTA | 
My RAAT wa AAIaTAT: 19211 
Stoka 72.—An omen standing between two others 


to its left and right with its cry being reciprocated by 
qe & 84+ 


666 deedigaraa [Adh. LXXXVI. Sl. 73-75, 


them indicates severally peril to a person from his own 
‘kith and kin and foes. (If both the flanking omens cry 
atcer it, then there will be trouble for both the quarters.) 
All the three crying simultaneously portend death. 

AMAAAYS Y TAATTRITAA: | 

alalsagiaay avalfaiamrra: 1.981 

Sloka73.--An omen standing at the top, middle 
or foot of a tree, indicates severally the arrival of a per- 
son riding an elephant, horse or chariot; one standIng on 
a long substance, a lotus or the like of it or something 
whose top is chopped olf, indicates severally the arrival 
of aman carried by another man, by a ship or by a 
sedan chair. 
ial ‘ * aie 
VREUAIS Al SMA SAAT | 
UH AIAAMA YUAN AeaUlg 7 vil 
Sloka 74.—An omen situated on a lofty height 

(such as a mountain) indicates the arrival of a person in 
a cart; one in the shadow, of a person holding an um- 
brella- Whatever good or bad consequences are indi- 
cated by the omens situated in the four quarters, East 
etc. or in the other corners, South-east, etc., will come to 
be felt in order in one, three, five and seven days. 


GeriayaagaalaHinaens a gIgT: RAT | 

aenetat qa Ra: gatdiseat (ea: Wes) 

Sloka75,—The lords of the eight quarters, East, 
South-east, South, South-west, West, North-west, North; 
and North-east are respectively Indra, Agni, Yama, 
Nirriti (King of evil Spirits), Varuna, Vayu, the Moon 
and Siva- The four prime quarters are masculine, while. 
the corners, feminine. 


Adh. LXXXVI. Sl. 76.) sesitfaaditsvara: 667 


This knowledge helps one to find out the name (synonym of 
Indra, etc.) of the person that has arrived or is going to arrive: 
or his tutelary deity. In queries regarding theft or the missing 
of an article, the omen goolor bid indicates the direction of 
thief and article, possibility of recovery, etc The worship of 
the particular deity will allay the fears of a parson who has seen 
a bad omen in that direction. Similarly the sex can be found 
out in the above cases, 


STATHAM SaTATTANTSTAT; EI | 
altace aah ty arate ii 


Sloka 76.—In the circle of quarters divided into 32 


a ig 4 
cas wi. 2 iti: 7s iy §. “ a 
na Hf ) +f ¢ . 
é Y omy %, 4 ¢ fi HS : 
wy \ ‘ + ws ia 3} a 7 w . 
os eee Va e 4 ’ fan . R a 
oe ma 
27 wah M ne ean 4 u item t 
art vt ge go! “ ° a ie 
ae "y, % : es. of . a 
4 — I: ¢g ¢ saree 
e 7 w ret ‘ cy . Cal a, 
'” 2% 5 ps rs . 4 7 * Ld 
+» Ike Gs ‘ e? . 
i” . & ; y. 
th s 3 t ¥ af 
\e : “ 
e : ; vw 
si ¢ ty, oy 
4 . 
“ as 2 
afy 


PapUeS snag wt 
‘A ie ; 


appe-om “tt 


668. qeeaftarara [Adh. LXXXVI. SI. 77-78: 


parts, if there bean omen in the eight directions be- 
‘ginning with the East, the respective materials on which 
writing may exist are a tree, palm-leaf, a worthless frag-: 
ment of leaf, cloth, water-product (lotus-leaf), reed, lea- 
ther and silk. The effects of the omens will be felt in 
the respective divisions. | 


SHAT aa aH MARSA A MSASAM ISTE | 
AME wHNaHHcnra: Borat fanz inell 


Sloka 77.—If omens are found in the eight quarters, 
their effects will be fclt severally near a place of military 
exercise, near a fire-place, where some sound is heard, 
where a quarrel takes piace, near water, where fetters 
and the like are kept, where Veda is chanted and where 
the bellowing of cows is heard. The colours of things that 
may be found as a result of omens in the prime quarters 
beginning with the East are in order, red, yellow, black 
and’ white ; but in the corners, they are mixed. 

In the 8. B., it is yellowish red; in S. W., dark-yellow; in 
N, W., grey and in N. I, pale-red. The use of this is—suppose 
an Omen has some substance with it; the person will get some 
object of the colour assigned to the particular quarter. This 
knowledge may be made use of in cases of theft and missing 
articles, or colours of cloths, or devotion to deities presiding over 
the colours. 


Pre cast Bqay BATA TU AS TAIT T AT | 
way aaiaana eaceana ar maaan eet 


' Bloka 78.—The signs of the eight quarters begin- 
ning with the East are: a banner, something burnt, a 
burial ground, a cave, water, a moyntain, a sacrifice and 
a hamlet of cow-herds (or proclamation ?). Good or bad 
emeris stationed on these signs augur a meeting’ with 


Adh, LXXXVI. SI. 79-80.) veshitaaiscara: 6690: 


some good person or danger respectively. Other things 
viz., good or bad doings (presaged by omens) take place 
in auspicious or inauspicious quarters. ‘ 


aint Maen edt gan sagt Ane cay ataaaT | 


gat nelat faa a ata aarafaraaftaizar: eqe ve 
Sloka 79—When the question refers to women,, 
omens appearing in the several quarters beginning with ; 
the East point to a buxom woman, a virgin, a woman of, 
defective limbs, one that is stinking, one of blue-saree 
a wicked woman, a tall one, and a widow respectively. j 
These are useful in questions pertaining to meetings. 
There is another interpretation, since women are assigned to 
the corners. The four corners N. E., S. E., S. W., ‘and N, W., 


indicate severally a buxom virgin, a crippled and a stinking 
woman a wicked woman of blue cloth and a tall widow. 


THy sanqHgcaniaaat WeawaaaaTged AIG I. 
TWMUTHAIVTRM ARI SIIGIZAT @ecseraqrgyavall: 


Sloka &0.—When at a query the querist or an omen 
stands in any of the eight quarters, the question refers 
severally to silver, gold, a sick person, a charming dam- 
sel, a goat or sheep, a vehicle (or journey), a sacrifice or 
acow-shed. Similarly the trees corresponding to these 
quarters are inorder, the banyan, a red tree, Lodhra, 
bambogsmango, Khadira, Bilwa‘and Arjuna. 

When there is a good omen in the above quarters, one may 
get tho articles belonging to them; otherwise, one will lose them. 
It refers to loss or theft of the several articles, ; 

The latter half gives us a clue as to which tree will flourish 
ineach of the quarters. 


wagbus ends the 86th Adfyaya on ‘Omens through Birds and 
Beasts.” 


EE 


670: geeaivatara, ([Adh. LXXXVII. Si. 1-4, 
HAI icollThe Circle of Quarters. 


aeat fete ararat feTataaaad ate | 
VPA CHT AloreageqaaesigT 12M 


Sloka 1.—An omen crying inthe East which hap- 
pens to be ‘ Tranqui!’ indicates the arrival of an officer 


of the king, the gaining of honour and the acquisition of 


excellent jewels and objects. 


. ' The above rule applies only toa good omen. ‘If it is other- 
wise, the result will be different. 


aearatehy HAKATA aaassaraalys | 
MAIIATTBSIAACTALA AIBA UN 
- Sloka 2.—TIf it is in the second division (Kosadhya- 
ksha’s), it indicates the gain of gold and the accomplish- 
ment of the desired object; if in the third (Agnijeevi), 
there will be the gain of weapons, wealth or areca nuts. 


fwakaa waged aad anita | 
mlsaatatgacda BTA: 3M 
_ Bloka 3.—If it is in the fourth division, one will 
meet a Brahmin friend, and one who worships the sacred 
fire daily ; if in the S. E. corner (Sth), one will see one’s 
servants or mendicants and get gold and iron (weapons). 
aria aagacad Mfaciiaaantta: | 
qraataaitta: ayaazeisarcaat |i 
. Bloka 4.—If it is in the first division of the South 


(6th), one will meet a prince, accomplish one’s under- 
taking and get the desired object ; if in the next division 


~ 


(7th), one will get a wife, acquire virtues, mustard .seeds, ' 


and barley corn, 


Adh. LXXXVII. SI. 5-9.] aeneftfanatseara: 644 


RMATIAS Bqgewy Waa | 
Gel ast BIAlT Baal aeygararar 1.4 
Sloka 5.—If it is in the 4th division from S. E. 
corner (8th), one will recover the lost article; and a 


traveller will reap whatever fruit has been fixed in res- 
pect of “ Journey’. 


walfate: anahana Piantegenertas | 
asqaiediaay Wemag: Ba Niaz Kl 
Sloka 6.—If it isin the right South (9th), the pur- 
pose of one’s journey will be fulfilled, and one will get 
peacocks, buffaloes and cocks; if in the second division 
(10th) from the South, one will come in contact with 


bards, dancers and the like, and enjoy happiness and 
satisfaction. 


aed fata: Saraagat diafitatatta: | 
TAAATAT ATT A THARTSISS (hol 


Sloka 7.—If it isin the next division (11th),- one 
will come in contact with fishermen, come by fishes, 
fafete birds and the like; if in the next (12th), one will 
see a recluse and yet cooked food and fruits. 


awat disracaisgizasata: | 


aefisa anaRatizdd BARAT lich 


Sloka 8.--If itis inS. W. (13th), one will get:a 
wife, a horse, ornaments, messenger (envoy) and a letter ; 
if in the next (14th), he will have the sight of hides and 
cobblers and get leathern articles. . 


araUAgraMasraed aa TATA 
PIGAATAVCATTAT BMAGUT lS 


649 axieiftarara [Adh, LXXXVIL. SI. 10-13 


ee RN “tEte ATR ReteRes NBA 


Sloka 9.—If it isin the 3rd division from’S. W. 
(15th), there will be the sight of a monkey, an ascetic or 
a Buddhist monk ; if in the next (16th), one will come a 
fruits, flowers or ivory articles. 


qTVOYAATIATAATAA MATT 
qzaisa: WAETNAAR aaa: 2o:t 


Sloka 10.—If it is in the West (17th), one will get 
marine products, gems, beryl, or jewelled articles; if in 
the next (18th), he will come in contact with foresters, 
hunters or thieves, and get meat. 


lon Ce 

GUAT Saat arate egarzertfeas | 

MAIABS PAZ AAT 12 I 

Sloka 11.—If it isin the next division (19th), one 
will meet rheumatic patients and get sandal-wood or 
Aguru; if in the next (20th), one will get weapons or 
books and have contact with those living by them; 
t..e., soldiers or weapon-makers, or authors or book- 
sellers. 


aasy BART as aa Baye | 
AWERASMIASeAUAT AASRSVSqvVTraryq 12 2il 
Sloka 12.—lf it is in the N. W. (21st', one, wili get 
° : Cay 
an effervescent thing, chowries or blankets and meet a 
merchant; if in the next (22nd), he will get earthen 
vessels or drums and such other musicals instruments, and 
meet bards. (According to the commentator, sale =a 
nude preceptor). 


nar 


arasaig gaia IT BATA TaTTitar | 
qTeaiea: Wieggeasaaray 12 il 


Adh. LXXXVII SI). 14-17.]  amretiftasitssara: 673 


uieetimeemernien omename ee 


Sloka 13.—If it isin the 3rd division from N. W. 
(23rd), one will meet one’s friend and acquire money ; 
if in the next (24th), he will obtain cloths or a horse. 
and meet a beloved person or a friend. 


ataguatata staercad a Ave t 
AMUMAA TAME A TWITTZT 12M 
Sloka 14.—Ilf it is in the North (25th), one will 
obtain curds, rice or fried grains and meet a Brahmin; 


if in the next (26th), he will come by wealth and meet 
a trader. 


TAAMISTATATA TW VHIISTIST | 

wa wea aaa aad Farenih: 24 
Sloka 15.—If it is in the next division (27th), one 
will come into contact with a courtesan, a celibate, or a 
slave, and obtain white flowers and fruits; if in the next 


(28th), he will meet a painter and get clothes of varied 
colours. 


areal AGHIAA BearaTasisa: | 
ME AMY THURS TATA THT EAT e EI 
Sloka 16.—lf it is in the N. E. (29th), one will come 
in contact with a worshipper of a deity, and get corn 
gems or a Cow; if in the next (30), i, e., the first division 
of the Fast, he will get clothes and meet a harlot. 
WHA AAA ASASITTA WAS: | 
ERITH ATATAMM Garg Aisgqy (1 2911 
Sloka 17.—If it is in the next (31st), one will meet, 
a dyer and get aquatic products ; if in the next (32nd), 
he will meet elephant-drivers and obtain wealth or an 
elephant. 
q. a ‘85. 


674 _Wwedfterara, (Adh. LXXXVII. Sl. 18422, 


Riaatran Ic GaAs TWAT TAS THT | 
Aaa Hilt aaa Aaeqy lee 
Sloka 18.—This.Cycle of Quarters divided into 32 
parts is applicable to the construction of houses as well. 
On account of omens appearing inside in the 8 spokes 
and the hub of the cycle, the effects are to be varied in 
9 ways. 
ate Teqagcariancaeeaar wala | 
MABISTAMTARAT JNA? eS U 
Sloka 19,—When a tranquil omen appears at the 
hub of the cycle, the person will meet relatives or friends 
and have great mental satisfaction; when at the eastern 
spoke, he will get red silk or clothes and meet a king. 


mae iswaTTRATaTT TT: | 
wieqa aHatat TeaTIAAsisaay Nol 
Sloka 20.—When it is at the S. E. spoke, he will 
meet a weaver, a carpenter, a labourer, a horse or a 
charioteer and obtain articles made by them or he will 
get a horse. 


qatar ag ATAANT @ Stay Fists | 


qMATACA TAA AIZASTAT U2 Vi 
Sloka 21,—When it is at the Southern speke either 
in the part of the hub, or of the rim, he will come in 
contact with meritorious men and obtain religious merit, 
gal micnainisarra AAI Age: | 
SHA BWA BAA FSMAITA 7 Rit 
Sloka 22.--When it is at the S, W. spoke, he will 
meet a cow, a sportsman or a Kapalika monk, and obtain 
a bull, black gram, horse-gram and the like and also food. 


Adh. LXXXVII, Sl. 23-28.] aaretftaaiseara: 675 
aaa RR aseanate: galas tate t 
AGALAAGANAARSAT SIT Rl 

Sloka 23.—When it is at the Western spoke, he 
will meet husbandmen, and obtain marine articles, a kind 
of gem called gare, glass, fruits or wine. 


aagagiagnreaaas a agenda | 
fAVRSAAA ews AaAGaAAI*_TIA’| UV 
, Sloka 24.—- When it is at the N. W. spoke, he wiil 
see a load-bearer, a carpenter or a mendicant and will 
get Tilaka, Naga and Punnaga flowers. 
alral RA aster Raarrareana | 
SIUC COMIC CI CAICCE C MICU 
Sloka 25.—When it js at the Northern spoke, it 


indicates gain of wealth and meeting with a devotee of 
Lord Vishnu and those clad in yellow-robes. 


ala ACTH Afra Aexaat ABT | 
weg ata Hear as TATA UREN 
Sloka 26.—When it is at the N. E. spoke, a lady 
observing a religious vow will come within sight, and 
there will be a gain of steel, weapons and gongs. 
—. arraseiay qaraizeaaqedg aerKat | 
aicda 4 feata AAT AAT AAT 1 
ATR FT Wea JaRnsat vale we avy | 
ATTST AMARA? FAT AAT elt 
Slokas 27-28.—If there be an omen in any of the 
points, viz., the South, the 2nd, 3rd, 6th, 7th, and 8th of 


the West and the 2nd of the North, the journey will 
have very little good effect, while in other points, it will 


G76 qeeaitatary [Adh. LXXXVII. SI. 20-34, 


ele a a tH aT ETS COE 


be splendid. In the inner circle of the hub, one will 
bestow beneficial effects, if itis in any of the six spokes ; 
but in the N. Western and S. Western spokes, it will 
make the journey beset with troubles. 

Here 48Ta means nothing special except one of the points into 
which the 8 quarters are divided. 

In the cycle of 32 points, the 9th, 18th, 19th, 22nd, 23rd, 24th 
and 26th are not very good ; the rest are good. The latter verse 
refers to a circle of 8 spokes. 


arag my noage ctaadstraranih | 
Seah ae aeeReT ATA THOTT 12S 
Sloka 29.—The effects enumerated above refer only 
to ‘ Tranquil’ quarters ; I shall now expound those per- 
bining to the ‘ Burning’ ones: An omen in the ‘ Burn- 
ing’ East, causes danger from the sovereign and contact 
with one’s foes. 
— aeaTATAID Alea Ha WF Qarlarerayry | 
AAAAATAA BIE? TAIT (Rol 
Sloka 30.—One in the next point causes loss of gold 
and threat to gold-smiths; in the 3rd, loss of wealth, 
quarrel and clash of arms. 
aaa @ aad waaay a val Wea: | 
aioniaty fala saat qragafiara: zen 
Sloka 381.—One in the 4th division engenders dan- 
ger from fire; inthe S. E. corner (5th), danger from 
thieves ; in the next division (6th), loss of wealth, and 
death of a prince. 


TATA AAAAaAA AAAI | 
SUTRAS TIT TSHSITT NR 
_ Sloka 32.—One in the 3rd division from S. E. (7th): 
cquses, the abortion of one’s wife; in the next (8th), the 


Adh, LXXXVI. SI.33-36.]  aareffaaatsvara: 6? 


anne etre eR A as Sty warrantee: 


ruin (death) of gold vendors (goldsmiths) and sculptors 
(painters), and clash of arms. 


AE Waa FING aaa FT ames | 
Bf Wa Fa aeaa aelzarany 32i 
Sloka 83.—An omen occurring in the 6th ‘Burning’ 
division (9th from the above corner) produces danger 
from the King, brings about pestilence and the sight of a 
dead bodey ; in the next (10th), danger from (or to?) 
musicians and acrobats. 
anizd can be taken as a single compound; in that case, it 
would mean the sight of those that die of pestilence. 7744 may 
mean a Class of demi-gods. 
dtawaigitaal aaa wala 219 | 
aaa sal Maleaas FT aazas ze 
Sloka 34.—An omen in the 7th Division from the 
corner (¢. e. 11th) which is ‘Burning’ causes danger from: 
fishermen and fowlers (or to them ?); in the next (12th), 
destruction of food and trouble from naked monks. 


RSE AMTATH THAAST TRI | 
MITA THs Rasad ARTA UII 


Stoka 35.—An omen inthe South-western corner 
(13th) which happens to be * Burning’ causes quarrel, 
flow of élood and clash of weapons; in the first division 
of the West (14th), destruction of leathern articles and 
threat to (or from ?) cobblers, 


aeaeat etna Tet TATA | 
qeas aes qaennt Ay seas Akt 


. Sloka 36.—An omen inthe next division (15th) that is 
‘Burning’ causes fear from (or to ?) recluses and Buddhist 


678 | —- geedigarata, (Adh. LXXXVII. SL. 37.40,. 


monks ; in the next (16th), threat of starvation; in the 
West (17th), danger from rain ; in the next (18th), peril. 
from (or to ?) dogs and thieves. 


agar: We Te TageTatay | 

BUR CORARCECLCCCCICROCMIEN)] 

Sloka 37.—An omen in the next quarter (19th) leads 
to destruction by storm; in the next (20th), to danger 
from those that live by weapons (soldiers) and books 
(authors or sellers) ; in the N. W. (21st), to the loss of. 
books ; in the next (22nd), to danger from poison, thieves 
and wind. 


qual Aataat fia: ae Rae Axa: | 
TAATATTTN ATA @ gesqa: wT URI 
Sloka 88.—An omen in the next ‘Burning’ quarter 
(23rd) brings about loss of money, and strife with one's 
own friends; in the next (24th), death from a horse (or . 
of ones’ horse) and danger from (or to ?) the priest. 
METIAUNAIEW ATT TTA A | 
MAA A qa arafsacranarary se 
Sloka 89.—An omen in the north (25th) causes theft 
of one’s cattle and hit from weapons; in the next (26th), 
ruin from a caravan and loss of wealth; in the next | 
(27th), trouble from dogs, Vratya Brahmins, slaves and . 
harlots. 


aieq is a Brahmin whose 37444, investiture with the sacred 
thread, takes place between his 8th and 16th year. 


agraaray fareaisagne THT | 
Rare cated TTT TAAOTTA 18 ol 

°! Sloka 40.—An omen in the division (28th) previous - 
tN; E; causes trouble to one’s coloured cloths and.from: 


Adh. LXXXVII. Sl. 41-44] aaneititaatsvara: 69 


‘painters; one in the N. E. (29th), peril from fire and 
corruption of noble ladies. 


Mwaaaa arate faa Fara | 
wage waa Far wesHat a lee 
Sloka 41.- An omen in the division next to. the 
above (30th), produces grief and death of one’s. wife ; 
one in the next (31st), danger from dyers (washermen) 
and perfumers. -_ 
atUEAsT Vez ahaa weeanral | 
AVIA FT IA TAA TF TT We 
Sloka 42.—An omen in the last (32nd) division of 
the circle causes trouble from elephant-drivers, and death 
of one’s elephants (or one’s own death through an ele- 
phant). An omen stationed inside in the Eastern spoke 
that is ‘Burning’ causes undoubtedly the demise of the 
wife. 
TRASTAUMAA aisawnAeqayay | 
aq qahiaaisiseqaeHe a aaT 1183 
AW Twat wang Ber wis aera | 
maa aasaat Bafaareaad wala ieen 
sengaagier Rsaaeat a Raa: | 
araingiriet a ax aeat gags Weel. 
Slokas 43-45.—An omen appearing in the South: 
eastern spoke that is ‘Burning’ indicates clash of arms 
and outbreak of fire, and causes the destruction of horses 
and danger from artists; one in the Southern spoke 
leads to the destruction*»f meritorious decds; in the South- 


‘western spoke, to death from fire, sudden attack of 
ruffians ; in the Western spoke, to danger from workers’, 


BBO qeeaitaraia (Adh. LXXXVIIT. SI. 1-2, 


T eeeiraamnnacaianamdiaminetaraanemmmannnae anaes tiindatimieteattihinmincs ai attest neat ee ga ee 


mn the N.W. spoke, to the death of donkeys and camels; 
and to peril from cholera and poison to mankind ; one in 
the Northern spoke, to troubles to the estate and 
Brahmins ; in the N. E. spoke, to mental affliction, trouble 
from rustics and cowherds. An omen in the hub that is 
‘Burning’ causes one’s own death, 

In this Chapter, we think the effects pertain not to a person 
that observes an omen, good or bad, but to a class in general unless 
otherwise stated. 


Thus ends the 87th Adhyaya on “ the Circle of Quarters ”’, 


fey UCC! On Cries of Birds and Beasts. 


a ee LS 
VAM AATARASTS MG AAT IH EIA- 
AWMVTHAMIEHAR NST KNIT | 
ANCIAFHSHAFTST TATA BT: 
iN ~ ~ 
Hees GepeHtacH: Ment ara: 2 
Sloka 1.—The following creatures are called diur- 
nal, those that roam by day :—The Syama bird (cuckoo) 
the hawk, the hare killer, Vanjula, peacock, Srikarna, 
ruddy goose, Chasha, Andiraka, Khanjarita, parrot, 
crow, dove (of three kinds, viz., Apandura (grey), Chitra- 
kapota, and Kunkuma dhumrassaffron in colour), Bhara- 
dwaja, Potters’ cock, donkey, Harita, vulture, monkey, 
Phenta, cock, Purnakuta and sparrow. 
In this list, all except donkey and monkey are birds. 


STs Riatesttenreat ARASH VIA WAT | 


at aHmaaTitn: Is ANT ANTI TN 
 Bloka 2.—The hair-eater, Pingala, Chippika, Val. 
guli, owl, and hare are noctural beings. If the creatures 


Adh. LXXXVIII. SI}. 3-9.! aersitttaatssara; 681 


ALE 71 gece INNER BEM a ms Alrante 


belonging to the above categories move contrary to 
their fixed periods, they leadto the destruction of the 
country or the King. 
G 

SAAT AMSA ea 

TRAGOHTSF AMM UAL: | 
DIITTTTS MASAI 

aiaaart fete: ana: BRT 3 

Sloka 38.—Those that are both diurnal and nocturnal 

are the horse, man, snake, camel, leopard, lion, bear, 
iguana, wolf, mungoose, deer, doz, goat, cow, tiger, 
swan, spotted antelope, stay, jackal, porcupine, cuckoo, 
Cat, crane and boar. 


AVHCUNSTARAUTKE WRTAST: TT | 
AAFGaRIal: (HSH GAH Sa UI 
UAH FAINT ASYoR: Hraa aiewvaqrqy | 
SePHeall AA Asal news se Wah 
MAMSMAAAGAR? RITHUTHT | TT | 
wea Reale Me ya aReaTT gn 
qaisai aves: aearat eee; TaTISAT | 
FART Bala: HRAR: FIHTs AeA? li 
aaigzgena sad ¢ HulaETH ara | 
Weniwsia asa Aga gearae| ticit 
fesql yrqa ows MIS: Qlq HIST WaT | 
A AT SH ae) asa a aaa ue 


Slokas 4-9,—The synonyms of the bird Purnakuta 
are Bhasha, Kutapuri, Kurabaka and Karayika; those of 
Ulukacheti, Pingaljka, Pechika and Hakka; those of 

q- 86 


Ww 


682 geeatearary [Adh, LXXXVIILSI. 10-11. 
Potaki, Kapotaki and Syama; Vanjulaka is called also 
Khadirachanchu ; the Sugandhamushika (smelling rat) 
is called Chuchchundari and Nripasuta; the donkey. is 
called Gardabha and Valeya; the Rala is called Srota- 
bhedya (cuts a stream), Tadagabhedya (tank-breaker), 
Ekaputraka and Kalahakaril-a ; this bird is two inghes in 
height and cries like a Bhringara (golden vase or a bird 
according to some) at night on the earth; the Durbalika 
is also called Bhandeeka; this bird situated to the right 
is favourable to the people of the East; the Dhikkara is 
a kind of deer ; the cock is called Krikavaku and Kuk- 
kuta; Gartakukkuta (Pit cock) is called Kulalakukkuta 
(potters’ cock) ; the house-lizard is called Grihagodhika 
and Kudyamatsya (wall-fish) ; the Divya is called Dhan- 
vana ; the boar is called Kroda and Sukara; the cow is 
called Gou and Usra; the dog is called Sva and Sara- 
meya; and by species, the Chatika (female sparrow) is 
called Sukarika. 
od Fy a aagea: agrees arate | 
THSACATA Wea aaa gisaia 12 011 

Sloka 10.—Thus in every country one ought to 
ascertain the names of birds and beasts, and making a 
collection of these, incorporate them in the science bear- 


ing upon omens in order to know (the effects of) their 
Cries. ; 


qawaed fafateta gigas masta aeqry | 
TAYRTARES AGATA Slats ULM 
Sloka 11.—The cry of the Vanjulaka resembling 
the sotind ‘ Thiththid ’ is called * Burning”, 4. ¢., malig- 
‘nant, but sounding “ Kilkili”, full and auspicious. The 


Adh, LXXXVIII. Sl. 12-17.] serftadsvara: ~~ 683 


hawk, parrot, vulture and kite having unnatural sounds 
are called ‘ Burning.”’ 


UaaaAz Masta BWA aalaaad at | 


AYA AUT TATAsaT Bsa LA 

MUSA Wistar! VT WAT | 

SFAYAS HS TAs WH BNITT 11231 

Slokas 12-13.—A dove sitting or building a nest on 

a vehicle, seat or bed, causes harm to men, and the time 
of its fruition is different for different kinds of the bird, 
The grey variety of dove causes the evil consequences to 
be felt within a year; the variegated one, within six 
months ; and the saffron-coloured one, immediately, 4.e., 
the same day. 


Ruaete ase: ql: aA Basia a aT | 
aafa a dia: aq aaaorna Fata ueen 
Sloka 14.—The cry of the Syama bird being like 
ri@zq is full and like gfe brings luck, but like aw it 
is “ burning’; while one like fa#iwa leads to the acqui- 
sition ot a beloved object or person. 
WIAA FT AST YY! Tisae water: eqs | 
MAT TT MIST DA WHT 24H 
Sloka 15.—The ‘ Guggu’ sound of the Hareeta is 
‘ Full’ while, others are ‘ burning’ ; all the variations of 
sound of the Bharadwaja are declared to be auspicious. 
FataQasz: gor: Hua Wa: BERET | 
dary as BRA a TafeewT ueeN 
“BSBA aera: ae: Heetla wea aan: | 
TES Hifefaona FT ala: BY THAs Aer? 112911 


684 — geeaiearara (Adh. LXXXVIII. SJ. 18-20, 


S esteuinesiaaandtinianmneiammennenananennendadammnnhteratemarnmeerahesamaaiatunraamaarncanmemnae anteenaeraanen toned 


Slokas 16-17—The ‘ Kishkishi’ sound of the Kara- 
yika is full and ‘ Kaha kaha’, auspicious; while the 
‘Kara kara’ sound is only for status-quo and not for fresh 
acquisition of wealth. Its own sound like ‘ Kotukli’ 
bestows sound health; ‘ Katukli‘ leads to rain; ‘Kotu- 
kili’ is worthless and the sound ‘Gum’ is indeed 
‘ Burning’. 

° = Cus At a os 
le aa cad feqna igdan samnaikee | 
AMAT WHS AISI 339 araeiearegaa Nnecit 

Sloka 18.—The sight of the Divyaka to the left is 
commendable ; when it is only one cubit above the 
ground there alone, one’s objects will be achieved ; when 
itis in the same place but at a higher level than the 
body of a traveller, the whole earth as faras the oceans 
comes under his sway. 

HMaSAIPAMASRas KAMA TyrTMAy FT ara | 
AIT APia Aq a fret Sasi TAMAR FT Ue 

Sloka 19.—A snake moving towards a traveller in- 
dicates an encounter with his foes, and the death or ruin 
of his relatives; one moving from right to left during a 
journey does not lead to the accomplishment of his abject. 

HAT FAG a Usa 

TINT? FIST PAINTS | 
AMUMRGTIRITAT TG 

Bt Hla VY BAAHSsTAHRT loll 

Sloka 20,—The Khanjanaka bird seated on lotuses 
or on the heads of horses, elephants or serpents, bestows 
sovereignty ; on clean places oreon green grass, happi- 
ness ; while being seen on ashes, bones, fire-wood, husks, 
hair or straw, it causes grief for a year for certain, 


Adh,. LXXXVIII. SI. 21-24.] sersfifaaatseara: 685 


fastens fata gear Teansiseqarae | 
aaa fate aad aaesane Faas ue 
Sloka 21.—The “ Kilikilkili’’ sound of the Tittiri is 
‘tranquil’ and of auspicious results; otherwise, it is 
harmful. A hare crying and running on the left side of 
a person at night is said to be of beneficial result. 


sMBied an veld a gansregata ata | 
Vaalt HqAed Poss Bata F Tawvge 
Sloka 22.—The ‘ Kilikili’ sound of a monkey is 
said to be ‘ Burning’ and does not produce good results 
toa traveller; but the yg (chuglu) sound is favourable. 
The cry of a Kulalakukkuta (potters’ cock) is similar in 
effect to that of the monkey. 


Witt: HMA TIN sATE- 
age catangta ave ae | 
@ ais ae Bia aT Praral- 
. an ~ 
MAASAAAUTATHTA NRA 
Sloka 23.—If a blue jay with its mouth filled with 
worms, moths, ants or something like that, flies from 
left to right of a person or in the fashion of a Swasthika 


figure in the sky, it bestows before long very great pros= 
perity on him who is starting on a journey. 


NI Raat Averaaeqwaa Waar | 
Ta TINTS aal ate fAqay aca sas gfze: tee 
Sloka 24,—When a blue jay fights with a crow and 
is defeated by the lattey, the traveller to whose right the 
jay flies will suffer death; otherwise (when it is victorious 
and flies to the left), he will be victorious. 


686 geettaraia [Adh, LXXXVIII. SI. 25-28 
hale wigerae aang 
, aS: Bula ea aH AT Ta | 
sate aca ed a rar sq 
AANA YACHT Aaa Aa? N21 
Sloka 25 —When the blue jay flying to the left of 
a person cries as “‘ Keka’, or does like the Purna Kut! 
(Kiri kiri, kahakaha), it bestows success ; but its cry ‘‘ Kre- 


kra” is “Burning” and does not lead to happiness ; its 
mere sight is always favourable to a traveller. 


meeicnelia Gia wiibistsaera a cig ow | 
Rte: TA SAITAMA A aaa Ter Bal PIII 124! 


Sloka 62.—The Andeeraka is said ro be ‘ full’ and 
‘ Burning’ with the sounds ‘ Ti’ and ‘ Tittitti’ respec- 
tively. The Phenta seen to the right is auspicious; and 
no importance need be attached to its cry. 


aiated ¢ tia meat ad watag | 
e ~ AO AN \ 6 c ~ ~ 
Hey AS MBAR FST FIV ed RST 129i 
Sloka 27 —-The ‘‘ Kwakwakwa "’ sound of the © Sri- 
karna flying tothe right is said to be auspicious; the 
‘Chik chiki’ one is medium in effect, and all other 


sounds, they say, are without any good result. 


OO A! 


gaat Paueatens Frafenee R araa: | 

qa aie cat asa HaMatga asale RCH 
Sloka 28.—The sound “‘Chirilwirilu” of the Durbali 

tov to the left is said to be of favourable effects; if it 


flies from left to right, it gives erelong the success of the: 
undertaking. 


SERN Heer a afer At pe area ee Sree cat AR, anes 


Adh. LXXXVIII. Sl. 20-33 ] werattiaaiseara: 687 


Taataiaafiqana a seat eeoramaafa @ aaa 1. 

bas 

PAHS F AAAs AMAT ayaeqAITT NVI 
Sloka 29 .—lf the Durbali itself crying like “Chick 

chiki” flies from left to right, it helps to maintain only the 

status quo (or gives only bodily wealth} and does not 

fulfil the cherished objects. If it is otherwise (flies from 

right to left), it causes fear of death or imprisonment. 

wR a aller ga TS acraar AWA aT | 

alate faaashugiaa aaa falaq Roll 
Sloka 80.—A Sarika (+»t: ) crying like ‘ Krakra’ 

quickly or like ‘“Tretre” fearlessly, indicates the flow. of 

blood erelong from the limbs of a person starting on va 

journey. 


[ a i ES 


WHY gTnaaeeaeala qa 
aaa naa aig seaasq7: (13 2H 


Sloka 3I.—The “ faky, gy” sound of the Phenta 
to the left is declared to be favourable; the contrary, 
** Burning ”. 

He ai meagalea aaqdigiwasea Ra a ata: | 
a e @ re ¢ e OT 
AUS WEAAMA Aq BAAT aq AAgiea stay UV; 

Sloka 82,—A donkey standing in a place to the left 
of a traveller i is said to be very good ; one producing the 
sound of ¢ Om’ is beneficial to him; all other varieties 
of the donkeys’ braying wherever it may stand are called 
‘* Burning.” 

MERU AAT BF ATTA Tqay Wie | 


Ish qua sBar ada qk ga: TIT: matat: tt 
Sloka 33.—The stag and the deer producing the 9 
sound and the spotted antelope, the ef sound are‘ full’ ; 


‘$88 deedt@araa [Adh. LX XXVIII. SI. 34-36. 


all other sounds are said to be ‘‘ Burning”; those that 
are ‘ full’ are auspicious, while the ‘‘ Burning” ones are 
of evil consequences. 


aia Galea BRR TWATT- 
TAA VAT WATT UAT | 
aa: aaraaeaia farsa 
arin Usgwiaagigaia 3vi 
Sloka 34.—-The cocks crow as ®#8% when they 
are frightened ; all sounds barring the above at night 
produce fear; the high-pitched and natural sounds pro- 
duced by them free from illness towards the end of the 
night, bestow prosperity on the realm; city and sovereign. 
arataaia feast f§ fsternrar- 
« “ 
EIT YA: BORSA BWATET AWAIT: | 
alqeieted + Bai asa 
MET FI ANAT Hla args usa 
Sloka 85,—The Chippika sounds in many ways, 
but its “° Kulukulu” sound alone is favourable ; and the 
rest are harmful. Never is the mewing of a cat favoura- 
ble to a traveller. The sneezing of a cow certainly 
brings about the death of the traveller. 
EE Pots Cuatsry sracqaat ya 
TW Bayes adiqaiy a Ta aar PRieae | 
Aya: Boel al Fas dal: aHaya 
ayaa eagera a BA Bw Sa AT 12h 
“+ Sloka 86 --When the owl wishes for mating, it 
tries joyously as “ s@ age”. Its YS sound is “ full”, 
awhile the “‘Teiteia’’ sound is always ‘“‘ Burning”. When 


Adh. LXXXVIII. Sl. 37-41.]  weretiftasitseara: | 689 
Sanne 


it cries repeatedly as “asws"’, it indicates quarrel; 
the “ Tatattata” sound leads only to sufferings; and the 
rest being ‘‘ Burning ”’ are not favourable. 
AARIAAMERS TTaTAaised yrs | 
VHS AUX Bis at Blanea aaala Ary uo 
Sloha 87.—The simultaneous cries of a pair of 
cranes are of favourable effects; but when one alone 
cries, or when the other follows the cry after a long time, 
it is inauspicious, 
Piieaieieala waa: wa BU AST | 
Baste F 4 eau: aeisaSgaea J Ul 
Sloka 88.—The Pingala bird brings luck with its 
sound faftiaag; all other sounds of it are termed ‘Burn- 


ing,’’ 2. é., malefic. 
latte mrmTiale SUSI acd BBE TH | 
aaa Faq al Ry aa fata aaa i 


Sloka 89.—If it produces an ‘Isi’”’ sound, then the 
journey will not be a success; if a “ Kusu kusu” sound, 
it creates quarrel, I am now going totell you the way 


in which the bird indicates the fulfilment of one’s che. 
rished objects. 


array Raraawea aan saa4 13H | 
ane anraey frarmeiq TATE FAS TAS Voll 
wal fadlisantahaay f asqateai TT aase | 
STAM IAIIATAAT TAT FIT TTT NE ZH 


Slokas 40-41.—Betng pure and cladin new clothes, 
one should approach in the evening the tree which is the 


abode of the Pingala, and worship Brahman and other 
i. 3 87. 


690 |. Quedigarara “[Adh; LXXXVIII, Sl. 42-46. 


-Gods and also the tree with fine perfumes; then one 
should station one-self alone in the S. E. corner at mid- 
night, convince her (the bird) by oaths, referring to both 
Gods and men, and consult her about the contemplated 
object in this manner with the following hymn so that 
she might hear it well. 


fae az Hal aqeaianay raga | 
Beant aaaaat seat St weiss Nez 
MITPFSST TAA aaa SARA | 
MIUAET TSH CATTATTAT FTAs WEA 
TaeATFaE aq wat aa eUTeTTaME a | 
aawia Beat aa Ne lawgeQ Nes 
Slokas 42-44.—" O auspicious one, kindly divine the 
object about which I am consulting you, for, you are 
praised as the knower of all languages. I shall take leave 
of you, being informed of it by you, but I shall come 
back in the morning and question you, stationing myself 
inthe S. E, corner, I call upon you to explain to me 


through your activities the object I have in view, so that 
I may understand it without any ambiguity.”’ 


caaYR TOA TTUPATARAT BASHLATR: | 
TMNGTA Ke fafarmreaey FUSTMATIE TT US Ht 
maraeeiasty Rats: Tare Rea RAaSag 


TWA GS BAAR AMAA aATETT TT Vet 
Slokas 45-46.—If on being addressed the above 


words she cries ‘ fafieatisa’ from the top of the tree 
there will be success of the undertaking ; but if she cries 
‘feiarere’ oor ‘ gHargar’, there will be great, mental 


suffering. When she does not cry at,all, even then, there 


UXXXVIII. 47, LXXXIX'1 (a)] qeiamahtertiseare: 694 


will be the accomplishment of the object: Other’ effects’ 
will have to be deduced from the* Circle of Quarters” 
mentioned above. If she be perched on a high, middle 
or low branch, the effect will, in order, be very good, 
medium or bad. 
RepeassaamMaay Tila Prarqzemtaera: 
Soa basa aziqr gat g ar fafarsia waa vo. 
Sloka 47.—The effects of the house-lizard will have 
to be deduced from its cry and position in the circle of 
Quarters whether in any of the spokes or of the 32 divi- 
sious. The Chuchchundari (rabbit or squirrel) is malig- 
nant with the cry ‘fafez’, while it is full (auspicious) 
with ‘ fafars’ 


Thus ends the 88th Adhyaya on ‘“‘the Cries of Birdsand Beasts” 


Omens—Section IV. 


FAW liCSt! The Circle of Dogs. 


TRMBGaraMaa age waa KSAT TATSIHA 
CIA WAT wae gra al aaa aq MATA AT atta 
TAT Bala aNaaIRS aaa faedisaiaa: URa- 
THAT HAR TEI WITHANAATAAT | 

Dandaka 1 (a).—If a dog passes urine on a man, 
horse, clephant, pot, saddle, milky tree, heap of bricks, 
umbrella, bed, seat, mortar, banner, chowrie or a piece of 
ground covered with green grass or flowers, and goes in 
front of a traveller, then there will be success of his un- 
dertakinig ; if it urinates on wet cow dung, he will get a 


692... guadiferer, (Adh, LXXXIX. SI. 1 (b«1 (0). 


sumptuous meal; if on dry cow-dung, dry food, jaggery 
or sweets. 


AT AaSwWAeRiNNIT AAA F- 
saaeaIa «| aaasAtsieaTeatia «= YzTTgETaie 
WSR AA TW PATH AIST STATA 
Vaqeat ARTA AEMNAHs We aeyTtsaa: 
TFT | 

Dandaka I (b).—Again if the dog passes urine on 
or kicks a poisonous or thorny tree, fire-wood, stone, 
withered tree, bones or cremation ground, and goes in 
advance of a traveller, it indicates dire consequences to 
him ; if it urinates on couches or vessels made by potters 
and the like, unused and unbroken, the virgins in his 
house will be spoiled; if on those being used, his wife’s 
character will be besmirched ; the same refers to sandals 
also. If it urinates ona cow, there will be an admixture 
of blood in his family by its contact with low-class people. 


WAARUAS ATATAIAwAs Araaiiags ata- 
QUAASINATAN AAT BA ATeASiad BRT AAT 
Dita Wea: waedegariaaaiss Gar Paalewaarie- 
TA Basearrar Taare: Fazig: ae 
Taq | 


Dandaka I'(c).—When a dog comes towards a tra- 
veller with a slipper in its mouth, he will achieve sucess ; 
with meat, he will gain wealth ; with a wet bone, happi- 
ness; with a burning stick or dry bone, he will meet 
with his end; with an extinguished stick, he will get 
blows; with a human head, hand, foot or smaller 
limb, he will get lands; with a cloth, tree-bark (rags) or 


Adh. LXXXIX. Sh, 1-3.]' qenweftesiseara: 693. 


the like, miseries ; but according to some, good results: 
will accrue, when it carries a cloth. 
Naald ¢ Te wana saAaR aia a9: 

FRSA Tl Tag AaTaAagaar Aq at 

an d ¢ C moptanef. 
wad of Wat Ager Gaiggadaniy ya ad- 
ty Risa aieegsa ag wiser: aa 
Q\Ha (20 

Dandaka 1 (d).—When a dog enters a house with 
a dry bone in its mouth, there will be the death of the 
head of the family living in it; when it comes towards a 
traveller with achain, shrivelled creeper, thong or other 
means of tying in its mouth, he will suffer imprisonment; 
if it licks his feet or, shaking its ears, gets upon him, 
there will be obstacles to him; when it obstructs him or 
scratches its own limbs, he will have impediments ; when 


it sleeps with its legs raised, there will be evil to all 
persons. 


aaicasaiageal Gala qe aey ae aaa: | 


Wal Al Al AA: AAA Yatea Tayraraary Ul 

Sloka 2.—If one or more dogs bark at the Sun 

at Sun-rise from the middle of a village, it isan indica- 
tion of the immediate change of rulers. 


wicga: qaskseay WrasawrwawsraeT | 
ANSRSASTAIA Aiea: Aly BoeisTUs U3 


_ Sloka 3.—If a dog barks standing in the S. E. cor- 
ner and facing the Sun, there will erelong be danger 
from thieves and fire; if at mid-day. outbreak of fire 
and death (or death from fire); if in the afternoon, a 
‘sanguinary feud.. | 


694: qeeifgararg, (Adh. LXXXIX.’SI. 4-8: 


wry armniigasaas evra wag <a | 
WAUTHSSATIASYAN TA WT ASATHUAT UV! 
Sloka 4.—A dog barking at the Sun at Sunset indi- 

cates immediate danger to agriculturists; one barking 
towards the northwest in the evening, produces danger 
arising from wind and thieves. 
BISA aaHs Aaeayt dew a ari | 
fanaa Rakegay aearlhquasaaaarg Ukh 

| Sloka 5.—A dog barking at the North at midnight 
foretells trouble to Brahmins, and cattle-lifting ; one 
facing the N. E. towards the dawn, scandal about 
virgins, outbreak of fire and miscarriage of foetus. 


THT! TILINHTTGA MATIN ATA TAT a | 
Tg ae Read diamcay a cea SAT NGI 


Sloka 6.—If dogs standing on heaps of straw or on 
the tops of palaces (temples) or mansions, bark very loud 
in the monsoon, they indicate very severe rain; in other 
seasons, death, fire er diseases. 


MITRE SEAS AMAA TARATASNT | 

Myerea a Marcy aa ws Feaear TTI lol 
Sloka 7.—If during a drought in the rainy season, 

dogs plunge in water, and then turning round and round 


shake off the water from their sides repeatedly, or stir, 
or drink the water, there will be rain within 12 days. 


av fu eae aft: adit tea ar aizefi ate | 
TAIT? ATI APUETeYal Ae a Taal ay lel! 


Sloka 8.—If a dog barks looking at the lady of the, 
house and placing its head on the threshold and body 


Adh, LXXXIX, Sh 9-12] qerraattaatscara: 695 


, 


outside, there wiH be illness in the house; if, on the 
other hand, it stands inside the house and barks facing 
(her in) the yard outside, the lady, it is to be noted, 
would be an adulteress. 


Sergtcatls Aral Atl aT AlaBAT ATT | 
Tega Tae aegreassaqalt qeagig NAN 
Sloka 9——When a dog scratches the wall of a 
house, there will be danger of burglary in it; when the 
ground in a cowsshed, cattle-lifting ; when corn-fields or 
granaries, gain of corn. 
CHAEMT AA awa TAHT ARES | 
TA TH ReaT: Ba Aaniva aes as Tio 
Sloka 10.—A dog having tears in one eye, looking 
pitiable and eating very little causes misery in the 


house; one sporting with cows indicates plenty “of food- 
grains, happiness, sound health and joy. 


ani aarg Rama aii: ak Aaa eee Fa 
BSE TA Versa aed Maseragiea 220 
Sloka 11.—If adog smells the left knee of a tra- 
veller, he will get money ; if the right knee, there will be 
quarrel with women ; if the left thigh, enjoyment of sen- 
sual pleasures ; if the right thigh, dissensions with beloved 
persons and friends. 
gat Panaaacaat weaita ats Fase | 
wraetraratat Batata Rat arat area: Bef ue 


Sloka 12,—If a dog smell the feet of a traveller, 
‘it forbids the journey; if those of one standing still, it 
indicates the acquisition of the desired amount of 


696 qeedfterara [Adh. LXXXIX. S]. 13-16. 
Seeing ane ennsnsnnnnentsyereeetntnerseeeeesnnnennnnenhiinatan 


wealth; if the slippers of one in his own place, an 
immediate journey. 


Saaey frat Re argiszat Regsieaeaai | 


ay aut wade aareatareity a aisraaara 11231 

Sloka 13.—If it smells both the arms, it would 
bring about the person's association with his enemies and 
thieves ; it it hide eatables, flesh or bones inside ashes, 
there would be shortly an out-break of fire.% 


me way ales SAMI aTiea VTAAg AAT: | 
fraraanthge Rana aer aera Peaks ang tl 


Sloka 14.—When dogs after barking in the village 
go out to the cemetery and bark there, a prominent per- 
son of the village will die. Whena dog barks facing a 
person desiring tu undertake a journey, it forbids the 
journey. 


CALA 


SHIT faeasuiatgcareaia : TTT | 


STAM Raa Aratayageaasaa q4lq Neel 
Sloka 15.—When a dog howls producing the sound 

of “U” or“ O” to the left of a traveller, he will 

achieve his objects (or get wealth); the sound of “Au” 


indicates distress ; and all kinds of cries behind him forbid 
the journey. 


waiala diva Geggd wilea Telia areata: | 
qastinaea wes I Yeast WyasT a Ha: 2! 
Sloka 16—The dogs that produce repeatedly the 
sound ‘ Kham kham” in a loud voice as if they are 
beaten with clubs, or run in a circular group towards a 


traveller indicate barrenness of his journey and pa of 
death. 


Adh. LKXXIX. SI. 17-20.] qa@ranaftasitseara: 697 


errasierremintinesapeiiencanien 4 tana sanmegwennaeel: 


THI gear ale se alent aad aegaica alsa: | 
Balat BE Jad VHA aadsashy aqraaagg ion 


Sloka 17,—If a dog showing its teeth licks the cor- 
ners of its mouth, the traveller will get a sumptuous 
meal, so opine those well-versed in the science ; but if 
it licks its mouth (facc) and not the corners of the 
mouth, there will be obstacle to his eating food, though 
he may have begun to eat it. 


MA ALY Ale A GUT WIA 4a gaged | 
q BAMwaa alaea qwrt aqaizaca eel 
Sloka 18,—If dogs bark repeatedly in a vroup in 
the middle of a village or town, its lord will get into 
trouble ; a wild dog shall be treated just like a deer, 
aaa mala atagias euegaia afyaea der | 
AANGS AAMT Deleas Vist Tey | age 2h 
ad FT Vz AAU We Aged! Waza aig | 
AUNTS TATA WA ATA: Hqaeadiony Roll 
Slokas 19-20,—If a dog barks standing near a tree, 
there will be rain; if near Indra’s bolt (?), there will be 
trouble to the king's minister; if in the N. W. corner 
inside a house, danger to the crops; if in the city-gate, 
suffering in the city ; if on beds, peril to their owners; 
dogs barking behind a traveller cause danger to him; 


those barking to the left of men indicate peril from their 
enemies, 


Thus ends the 89th Adayaya on “ The Circle of Dogs ". 


‘| a 88 


698 «geeaigarary = [Adh. XC, Si. 1-5. 


renLnapene Ne ney eRe ee CNR TE Maen Si RNRENAT ONTO ReR OREN my AedeanbeeeeT 
4 
. 


Omens: Section V 
Rasy tiSel —On the Cries of Jackals. 


MA AUS ata Koa Aas cat MAT arly: | 
CLOAK A WIT TST Wo: ATsea Bars sata: UU 

Sloka 1.—Jackals are similar to dogs in effect with 
the difference that the former get passion for mating in 
the ‘ Sisira’ season (months of Magha and Phalguna). 
The sounds ‘ gg’ at the end of their howling and ‘ ear’ 
at other times are ‘full’; all other sounds are said to 
be ° Burning ’. 

[Since Sisira is the season for the jackals to be intoxicated, 
their cries then are of no value.] 


BAUM AY RHIST! GT: MATT a aa: | 
Usey BUA THAITIAT: as a eign ga aeaieer ei 
Sloka 2,—And the sound *' Kakka” of the Loma- 
sika (Hair-eater) is ‘ Full’, for, that is its natural cry ; 
all other sounds being opposed to the natural one are 
termed “ Burning.” 
qaigieas frat gent arat adr gear | 
qinatigel eta araiqn eaftaqerz ai 
Sloka 3.—The jackal is commendable in the east 
and the north ; one stationed in a “Tranquil’ quarter and 
having a pleasant sound is always highly favourable ; 
one facing the ‘ Smoking’ quarter and‘ Burning’ in res- 
pect of voice destroys the rulers of that direction. 


war Gat Far s,..net This is merely a repetition of 
Sloka 34 of Adhyaya LXXXVI. . 


aaeeagar cat AaIongagaiaar | 
Re Aeysqasat y set aalegal Ma Wea 


Adh. XC. SI]. 6-10.] —- aarfaavitsvara: 699 


Sloka 5.—In all quarters,a ‘ Burning’ jackal is of 
evil consequences especially in the day-time; one going 
from right to left of a town or army and facing the Sun 
is harmful. | 

qeraaad Tia etela Baaeat | 
fabargsatarae asarer saat tl 

Sloka 6.—If its cry is like ‘arf€’, there will be 
danger from fire ; if like ‘ tat’, the news of somebody’s 
death; if like ‘fae fae ', great calamity ; if it is flam- 
ing in the mouth, the country will be destroyed. 

AT GAA ASST TATA | 


ABAAGA TAL TFT BISTAATAT 11191 
Sloka 7.—Some sages (such as Kasyapa) do not 
declare the dreadful nature of the flaming jackal. For; 
on account of the intrinsic nature of its saliva, its mouth 
is fiery like the Sun and other luminaries. 


Another reading is HiHledlateqq-like a burning log or like the 
circle of fire caused by the revolution of a burning stick. 


HeqRASM WF AeeqaAaar | 
TAVITAsA FF TAT ass WI, lel 
Sloka 8.—The cry of a jackal stationed in the South 


being re-echoed by another, indicates the death of a 
relative by hanging ; but in the West, by drowning. 


Tata: way VE sashes Hara: | 
ara TaTAT aeEatat FT Arq: S11 
HOATACUCATMA WAT Vay | 

Teal aAeIIS BS WIAA Pol 


Slokas 9-10—When a jackal howls once, twice. 
thrice, four times, five times, six times or seven times, the 


700 geeateararg, [Adh. XC. SI. 11-14. 


effects will severally be freedom from distress, hearing 
pleasant news gain of wealth, arrival of a beloved person, 
turmoil, dissension among the king’s ministers (or break- 
ing of a valuable article ?) or prosperity of vehicles. If it 
cries more times, no heed is to be given to that; but if 
it cries in the South, the above effects of the frequency 
will be just the contrary, save for the fifth or the sixth. 
(The respective effects in the South will be—distress, 
hearing unpleasant news, loss of wealth, separation from 
a beloved person, turmoil, dissension and loss of vehicles.), 


TU ANT aE Ta aT TAA | 
Wald A A TAA aT Arar aT Pawar nee 
Sloka 11.—A jackal that produces horripilation in 
men, makes horses pass dung and urine and frightens 
people through its howl, leads to dire results. 
ata wat afawd aie ara a | 
at fat at ea Bea ge ay ArATESTa UA 
Sloka 12.—When a jackal keeps quiet on its cry 
being reached by men, elephants or horses, whether in 


a town or military camp, prosperity will accrue to it 
therefrom. 


aaa far wagit wat saraeaieaa att 
afaacaaaeat fea ge arcaizar frat eaee sit 
Sloka 13.—If the jackal’s cry sounds like ‘#8’ the 
effect is dreadful; if like ‘ wrat’, there will be great 
misery ; if like ‘f%s’, death or imprisonment ; and if like 
‘ge’, benefit will accrue to the person. 


Mea AANA Warereal ziergaealy areaarat | 
2 a TS Wag YY Tals AeIAg Ba aT URI 


XC, 15, XCI. 1-2.) URATayAaASeAy: 701 
Sloka 14.—If a jackal standing in a ‘Tranquill’ 
direction and having pleasant voice produces any sound 
beginning with # or the harsh sound ‘ ztzt’, or first sound- 
ing like ‘ 22’ produces’ &&’ sound at the end, it is aus- 
picious For all these sounds are born of its heart’s joy. 


x c Lat 4 
SAUNT TYMNA CS Tq AIT BERAGEIM | 
ai al aa me ae aly aart ar asda Hao nea 
Sloka 15.—If a jackal at first cries producing some 
harsh sound in a very high pitch and then howls in its 
natural fashion, it indicates preservation and acquisition 


of wealth and union with a beloved person who had gone 
abroad. | 


Thus ends the 90th Adhyaya on “ The cries of Jackals”. 
Omens : Section VI 


anqeqq 11921! Omens connected with 
the Movements of Wild Animals. 


aaa ar Brea: Haar aNedisa TaTTATA! | 
“ ~ A CA qe Af 

aaa IAMS Aig Filer Bed oat wea: Ui 

Slok« 1.—Wild animals standing in a ‘ Burning’ 
quarter at the border of a town or village and crying in- 
dicate danger during the same day ; those going away 
from the border in the same circumstance, danger that 
is over; and those coming towards it, danger that is 
impending. If they go round it, the town or village will 
become a void. 


Y meqaTsegasaaal WIT Tara aaa wey: | 
Realy Tega aeqmEs A AAT SaleT URI 


702 qeedt@ararg, «= (XCI.3, XCII. 1-2. 


Sloka 2.—If the wild animals standing in the border 
of a towncry and are re-echoed by domestic rural 
animals, peril to the town is indicated ; if by other wild 
animals, siege ; and if by both domestic and wild animals, 
kidnapping of women. 


TY AT ALAA FTA Tal asa? qenias ara | 

ad aq: aid dia a He aa aad aeateey UN 
Sloka 3,—When a wild animal stands at the town- 

gate, the town will be besieged ; when the animal enters 

it, it will be destroyed ; when it brings forth a young 

one, there will be death; when it dies, danger; when it 

enters a home, its owner will be imprisoned. 


Thus ends the 91st Adhyaya on ‘‘ Omens connected with Wild 
Animals. 


Omens :—Section VII. 
wafyaq S211 The Intention of Cows. 


wa gan nfirearsars veya gem TTT | 
Bee FAecaTTaaes: Tey ilaraenwanssecas 2 


Stoka 1.—Cows looking jaded or pitiable indicate 
misery to the king ; burrowing the earth with their hoofs, 
diseases; having eyes filled with tears, owner's death ; 
bellowing in panic, trouble from thieves. 


aaa sata acaat vara wen ara: Brava | 
aa farsa ae afsanteacry af azaad at Ue 


Sloka 2.—If a cow cries without any reason, there 
will be calamity ; if at night, fear * but if a bull, happi- 
ness ; if a cow is completely swarmed in front with flies, 
ot obstructed by dogs, there will be rain very soon: 


XCIL. 3, XCIIt. 1-3.]  feefaastsvara: 703 


MAwseI AAITATAN aaa Wigael wat a | 
AASTA TT ELTA AEST AAT TMAs WMS Tsy Faq 

Sloka 8.—Ilf cows while coming ho:ine with the cry 
of aur follow other cows (fondling them), there will be 
increase of cowsin the cow-shed; if they are wet in 
body, happy or have the hair standing on ends, they 
bring fortune to their owner. The same remarks apply 
to she-buffalocs as well. 

Thus ends the 92nd Adhyaya on “’ The Intention of Cows”. 


| Omens :—Section VIII. 
HaZay 2311 The Intention of Horses. 


TAM PACHA TWA FT saTwaAasTe TTR | 
AANRSABART Ge Talat | AT TEAR BIA AT ULM 
Sloka 1.—It is a general rule that a flame behind 
and to the left of a horse’s back (when saddle is put), 
is not beneficial; elsewhere it is favourable. Flaming 
all over the body of horses leads to loss; so do sparks 
or smoke on their body, for two years continuously. 
8 Am AD ba ® “ 
Hear TK AMITUG AS Bigs aa qegqer wala | 
qT YSS FT WTI: ATH AARSISA TAT UR 
Sloka 2.—The flame appearing in a horse’s penis 
causes the ruin of the King’s harem; in the stomach, 
of his treasure; in the anus and the tail, leads to the 
King’s defeat; in the face and head, to victory. 


HeqUAalasisad TAT Aeala Tasasa afeeq | 


BHTAASaA FI YA TAM SATs TAT 
Stoka 8.—The flaming of a horse’s shoulders, back 
or sides of the neek leads to the owner's victory ; the. 


"04 geealgarara [Adh. XCIII. SI]. 4-9 


Ca Ee ee eee aa. aenaemaiainnnenmee 


flaming of the hind legs, to his imprisonment ; smoke in 
its forehead, breast, eyes or fore-legs, to defeat, while 
flame in the above limbs leads to victory. 
AANGSMAASANTAA J Ua SAB AIA | 
~ iy a oe wn ~ 
GoVUAUAaTUTT ied BRIA MAAS aT th 
Sloka 4 —The flaming at night of the snout, middle 
of the nose, head, the lower part of the cheeks and eyes 
of horses that are green, copper-hued, dark or variegated 
confers success; it is always (both by day and _ night) 
auspicious with those that are white or have the hue of 
parrots. 
Het waaeaal waa Bal falaansar 
HEU Tl AAT CHIT YAQ al aray: | 


| pik 


aarag fuitaat fata ar Max@aeatazat 

asad Mawaat ae aa THAT Al 

Stoka 5.—Antlpathy to grass and water, falling 
down, sweating, convulsion without any cause, falling 
of blood from or appearing of smoke in the mouth, keep- 
ing vigil at night through hatred (or quarrel), drowsiness 
and pensive mood by day, languor and down-cast face— 
none of these activities of horses is said to be favourable. 


MUenaeaitsat winizgaa awa: 
STUACSAT at Heraiq Aqagraar 1&1! 
Sloka,6.—If a horse carrying a saddle and a rider 
gets upon another horse, or if the royal horse that is 
quite fit meets with some disaster, there will be misery. 
miaaiggca 20d daa wast FT aegay | 
feraqaagait gaqmasgaay WA: HO! 
Sloka 7.—If a horse neighs like the Krauncha bird, 
or does, with its face raised and neck motionless, or has 


Adh. XC1I1I. SI. 8-11] @rvataqatscara: 705 


a sweet loud and resonant neigh, or neighs with its mouth 
full of grass, the enemy will be killed. 


TUATUATAAATATTIATETTETHSHIAANS aT | 
gearaaaal a wT ae aAtray Fa: lNclt 


Sloka 8.—If in the nerel yeurhiodd of a horse that 
neighs there is a full pot (one filled with auspicious sub- 
stances), curds, a Brahmin, a deity, perfumes, flowers, 
fruits, gold, etc. or some other desirable article, there 
will be victory. 


WETMTASA ATA: weg tiaamaeeaisea | 
TEANATATTASUATT TUSSAICRSTATHAT! UST 
Sloka 9.—Horses that willingly take to their fodder, 
drink and bit or other accoutrements, or cast glances at 


their right side, bestow all desired objects on their 
masters, 


aaa wacarter wai Tua walea WT: | 
AVA iq BIeal eGleq ARHITTUITAT Lott 
Sloka 10.—I horses stamp the earth with their left 
hoofs, their master will go abroad ; if they neigh facing 
the ‘ Burning ' quarter at any juncture (morning, evening, 


midday or midnight), he will suffer imprisonment or 
defeat, 


adit galed Parla aratg fagivara naaisa aTatq | 
bas’ “A 
VAM ATAU Way Tay VAT TAT 18 


Sloka 11.—If they neigh too much (too frequently), 
shake their tails or are sleepy, their master will goon a 
journey ; if they drop hair, have feeble or harsh sound, 
or eat the dust of the earth, they indicate danger to 
their master. 

$389) 


706 geeifearary [Adh. XCII1. SI. 12-15. 


aanackngaiaa: of agidacr a citret fran: | 
TANT AIT areaers HE TararmArAisyTTA UA 
Sloka 12.—If horses lie on their right side like a 
box or stand onthe ground with their right leg raised, 
there will be success. The same effects as given above 
will have to be applied by a wise man to other vehicles 


(animals such as elephants and camels) as well according 
to the circumstances. 


aaela fatacdt faaiarat 
MMTMSATIa AaeW | 
THAT Tr aia sya 
asa: @ aeeang Wada seaiq 23h 
Sloka 13.—The horse that is very subservient, when 
the king mounts it, goes in the direction to which the 
king is bound (or follows the party of sojourners), and 


reciprocates when others neigh, or touches its right side 
with its mouth, enhances erelong its master’s wealth. 


YACHTING F TeTMascrqaawar | 
“ ~ re ¢ ba ~ 
wHrMaswassaay AA a waraTashrra uel 
Sloka 14.—The horse that passes urine and dung 
too freqhently, does not go along the proper direction 
though beaten, shows fright without any cause, and has 
tears in its eyes, does not indicate prosperity to its master, 


swlae eaaibana Hea ciaat vaeaa | 
aat & TeaReqaaRraraiasenas ees 


Sloka 15.—Thus have I expounded the activities of 
horses, Hereafter I shall describe’ those of elephants. 
Their effects—good or bad—will have to be judged from 


Adh. XCIV. Sl. 1-8. ]  ‘sqviafaaatseara: 107 


the cuttings, breaks, faded appearance, etc. of their tusks 
and other features.. 
Thus ends the 93rd Adhyaya on the “Intention of Horses”. 


Omens :—Section IX. 
ehaaieay Svit The Attitude of Elephants. 


aaa Fors fewrsa wiseT BeTa HI | 
aaeaqrauat aga fies Bag nett 
Sloka 1.—The elephant’s tusk should be cut off at 

a height that is equal to twice its girth at the root (or 
leave off a length equal to twice the circumference of 
the elephanf’s tusk at the root and cut off the rest); but 
in the case of elephants roaming about marshy places 
a little more than the above should be left off; and in the 
case of those of mountains, ‘a little less. 


This and the next five slokas are mere repetitions of Adb. 
LXXIX Pomienee 20 to 25. suara. - 


UE an: gaia: avay Baral aasg lL 
“ASASARSa F aaa ayia Asa 19 
Sloka ¢.—The cutting of the tusk being white, 
even, of good smell and glossy bestows prosperity. ©The 


effects df the dropping down and the fading of colour of 
the tusk are similar to those ot its breaking. : 


YSAAC TAMIA Mal CAtAATTT: RATA | 
THATRETIUIST TS TiTaayMsaeTay cll 


Sloka 8.—The Gods, demons and men reside in 
the root, middle part and tip respectively of the elephant’s 


708 aeedigaraa, (Adh. XCIV. Sl. 9-11; 


tusk. The effects of omens in these parts will be in 
order, great, moderate and slight, and they will be felt 
in a short time, in some time (within a month), and 
after a long time (after a month), respectively. 


TeAUMHSAT TAN YIATAS ATI | 
TAG? Gaguled wary fea Melanararaary USI 
Sloka 9.—The effects of the right tusk breaking in 
these parts are severally the fleeing of the King, the 
population and the army; of the left tusk, the destruc. 
tion of the prince royal, preceptor and the mahout ; so 


also of the army of mountaineers, the consort and leading 
personages (commanders) respectively. 


MeIGMIAPTAATY WI THs FoTay | 
MeTSMAAANAAS VA TISYAAAISATGT aVq Uo 

Sloka 10.—If both the tusks are found to break; 
the wholesale ruin of the royal family is to be predicted ; 
but if the breaking occurs in a benefic Lagna (Taurus, 
Gemini, Cancer, Virgo, Libra, Sagittarius, Pisces), lunar 
day, asterism and the like, there will be ‘an increase 
of prosperity; otherwise, there will be an increase 
of misery. 

afaiaia or benefic ‘lunar days are those other than the ft 
one’s; €q asterisms are those other than z1em and 37 ones. By 


aifz, It is to be noted that the Lagna may be occupied or aspected 
by benefics, 


aivenagermgassamacsaiysaa at | 
MAMAAKASA BAATHTMSHAAT WI (2 Vit 


Sloka 11.—If the elephantebe found to break the 
middle of its left tusk by striking against milky trees, or 
trees laden with fruits or flowers, or the banks of rivers, 


Adh. XCIV. SI, 19.14.) eqotaftesiiseara: 709 


the destruction of the enémy is assured ; otherwise (against 
thorny trees, etc.) or at the breaking of the right tusk, 
there will be prosperity to the enemy. 


walsanlatatd AaHTislaaia: 
afala az galt snag: gaysay | 
Faagivmee: angie Fea 


AAHTAIAT AHMSTHIHAT ULV 

Sloka I2,—If the elephant has a stumbling gait, if 
its ears stop beating suddenly, if it appears very dejected, 
if it breathes soft and long, placing its trunk on the earth, 
if its eys are full of tears or closed, if it is always sleepy, 
if it behaves in a refractory manner, if it eats something 
unwholesome, or if it passes blood (ichor ?) and dung too 
frequently, it forebodes danger, 


ATAUPAMAYLAYTASAITAASSAT TEEI- 
VaqaaMa aRaaaaTsgAes VVe: | 
REMNAACHS TAA FI gE? alae sea a 
“ ~ ° e 
AHS TT HalyraHey w Avaq TAT Fz UU 
Sloka 13.—If the elephant breaks wantonly ant-hills 
trunks of -trees, bushes, green grass or trees, if it 
looks jolly, if it goes in the direction of the march, with 
quick steps, holding aloft its face, if at the time of its be- 
ing accoutred it ejects spray or trumpets repeatedly, or if 


it gets intoxicated at the time, or if it takes its trunk 
around the right tusk, it confers victory. 


cee TTA TTT TET ATTA ATTIT | 
wh adalat ara dag aes WSR Tas Neel 


Sloka 14.—If an elephant is dragged into water by 
a crocodile, the king’s destruction is indicated ; if, on the 


710 _. aeediteratay [Adb. XCV. SL 1-4 


other hand, the elephant comes back to- the bank drag- 
ging the crocodile from the water, the king will prosper, 
Thus ends the 94th Adhyaya on ‘The. Attitude of Elephants.” 


Omens :—Section X. 
qTWrAAAY US4il On the Cries of Crows. 


— aearat gana: Zar: Bra KUT RI TAT: | 
 faatigaraareaaisinaaera ui 
_- Sloka 1—~In the case of the people of the eastern 
countries, the sight of crows to their right:is favourable, 
but the Karayika is good when on’ the left side. This is 
to be reversed in other countries. The demarcation of 
the countries is to be understood duly from convention. 


ane fea ga aie: aftafracral 
fitqaweageagingraia der ue 
Sloka 2.—If a crow builds its nest in an unspoilt 
tree in the month of Vaisakha, there will be plenty of 


food and prosperity; if in a condemned, thorny, .or dry 
tree, there will be danger of famine in that country. 


. dig sremarat. ais aaq vaaaeeaayg | 
 apabaalasagq waraabeatreht 3 
Mas wevwaaat ae feunk | 
GRIT: Gist qrBaeTy was |i 
| Slokas 8-4,—If the crow’s nest be in an eastern 
branch of a tree, the first showers for the year will fall 


during the autumnal season ;_ if itis on a western branch, 
the rain will be in the rainy season itself; if itisona’ 


Adh. XCV. SI. 5-8.]  taraaftazitseare: 711 


southern or northern branch, there will be rain between 
the two seasons, rainy and autumnal ; if it is on the top of 
the tree, there will be copious rain in all the four months ; 
if itis in the S. E., there will be sporadic rain; if in the 
S. W., autumnal crops will flourish ; if in the other two 
corners, there will be plenty of food-grains, but in the 
N. W., rats will increase. 

SECO CCIM PI LIKI CUTMEE KE 

meat wala a Faaiaraletare: 14 

Sloka 5.—If the crow builds its nest on reeds, holy 

grass, bushes, creepers, corn, temples, houses or pits, the 


country will be denuded being afflicted with robbers, 
drought and diseases. 


feAraqiaaed aad waaay | 

mreaemaneaaay av Rar Wel 
Sloka 6-—A crow with two, three or four young 
ones confers abundance of food; with five, brings about 


a change of rulers; one throwing away the eggs, or lay- 
ing a single egg, or no egg at all, is not at all auspicious, 
~ ¢ ~ ~~ 

stew ata: fiaed aferay 
Rasta seat ieaeog: thot 
Sloka 7.—If the young ones of the crow sare of the 
eolour* of the perfume called Chauraka, there will be 
trouble from thieves; if of a mixture of colours, there 
will be death ; if white, there will be danger from fire ; 
if crippled, fear of famine. 


ATaMadedy aA ea: aaa TAVAUR: | 
Yreamrattetrearay atadae ici 


Sloka 8.—If crows congregate without any cause” it 


712 geeafrararg, [Adh. XCV. SI. 912. 


the middle of a village and caw aloud, there will be suf- 
fering from famine; if they fly ina circular group, the 
village will be besieged; if they appear in several groups, 
there will be disaster, 


TINA HSIAO qastararaaged: | 
CA re ~ ~ 
gala qaag fis Wawa Talzaraq le 
Sloka 9.—Ilf the crows attack people fearlessly with 
their beaks, wings or kicks, there will be an increase of 
enemies; if they fly at night, the destruction of the people 
is indicated. 
aaa G AAs: ary atlamMesy We | 
AMS WAPAATATAT WA Bas Nell 
Sloka 10.—If crows fly from left to right, there will 
be trouble from one’s own kinsmen; if from right to 


left, from enemies; if in a disorderly fashion, there will 
be a whirl-wind. 
RAYAASIA: WY WaT FRA aAeaya | 
AaAlsal FS WRAT aeayargt: 122 
Sloka 11.—Crows with their beaks raised and wings 
fluttering indicate danger to a traveller on his way ; those 
stealing corn, famine ; those perched on something per- 
taining to the army, a battle; those that have wings simt- 
lar (very dark) to those of the cuckou, theft. 
ammagaain Reaaq gata azarany | 
WMNGQMAIAT TIA AeHCAAFATATA ULV 
Sloka 12.—If it throws ashes, bones, hair or leaves 
on a couch, the owner will meet with his end; if it strikes 
the bed with a gem, flower or something like that, a son 
will be born to him-; if with grass, a stick or 80, a 
daughter. 


aAdb. XCV. SI. 13-17.) saaaadistara: 713 


Wiaasyar faaaramagaga: | 
Waal AAaaAAy wos#weaqaregras 1231 
Sloka 13,—When the crow’s mouth is filled with 
sand, corn, wet clay, flower or the like, there is influx of 
wealth ; when it takes away vessels (treasures?) from a 
place where dwell many people, there is disaster. 
TMCAVAUTASSASHTARFSA ATTY | 
aeqatat Tat gHUsaaesiq: UV 
Sloka 14.—If the crow strikes a vehicle, weapon, 
slipper, shade of the umbrella or a man himself, the 
person concerned will die; if it worships (with flowers, 


etc,) any of these, he will get honour; if it passes excreta, 
he will get food. 


TAR SAYITAA aiearaeue * FOAM: BAG | 
asses wah Te BTM: WA Kea 14H 


Sloka 15.—A person will gain or lose whatever 
article the crow brings near or takes away from him. If 
the article brought or taken away be yellow in colour, it 
will be gold ; if cotton, clothes ; if white, silver, 


adagarsqaugazagieam CAA | 
Mae ale gieangar aay sass: 112811 


Sloka 16.—If in the rainy season the crow caws sit- 
ting on’ a milky tree, the Arjuna, the Vanjula, on the 
banks of rivers, or on sand dunes, there will be good rain; 
in other seasons, the sky will be overcast Similarly, ii 
it bathes in dust or water in the rainy season, there will be 
rain; in others, only a cloudy sky. 


STOMA TRERSUTA aaa Aaa: | 


afeanaaed & faery qeatissqigual a 1201 
asa 90. 


714 qeeditarama [Adh. XCV. SI. 18-21. 


cen oe LNA SOREN RATA REION, amp pasinabtibetntiy-e got dup~tee dae rinearanntSsNeseeahete nl 


Sloka 17.—If the crow caws frightfully from the in- 
terior of a tree-hollow, there will be great danger; if it 
caws looking at water, or after the thunder of clouds, 
there will be rain. 


dada er Aaggay afaatzgara: | 

THAEG AIT TNHIG Al Ve Azaq ill 
Sloka 18.—If it strikes its beak in pain against a 
branch standing in the ‘ Burning’ quarter and shaking 
its wings, there will be danger from fire; if it brings a 


red substance, something burnt, grass or wood into a 
house, the same effect will have to be declared, 
Ueanfetenasial aaiygel say TE Tee: | 
UARAANATITAHST? Tr TAAY AA 2S 
Sloka 19.—lf the crow facing the Sun caws from a 
house, looking at the East, South, West or North, the 
owner will have trouble from the king, thieves, imprison- 
ment or quarrel respectively; if it isin any corner, his 


domestic animals will suffer (or he will be troubled by 
them). 


MeAMA AAS BAY SIUTIATSUAAIY: | - 
aaa F gameita Wesaqeaays liRell 


Sloka 20.—If the crow caws looking at the East that 
is ‘tranquil’, there will be meeting with kings’ officers and 
friends, and acquisition of gold and food consisting of 
rice and sweet pudding. 


SPECI CCUCCECCCInGICE Mit 


TY HISAASa areatealer: 11221 
Sloka 21.--If it caws looking at the S. E. -that is 
Tranquil’, there will be the gain af goldsmiths (those 


Adh. XCV. Sl. 22-26.] varaaftadtsvara: 715 


that live by fire), young damsels and costly minerals; if 
at the South, one will eat food prepared from black- 
gram and horse-gram and come into contact with musi- 
cians. 


amet CATT HTT AS Iss STAT: 

Teal atagruarawssaagzeeaiay: UVa! 
Sloka 22.—If the crow caws looking at the S. W. 
that is ‘ Tranquil’, one will get messengers, horses, im- 


plements, curds, oils, flesh and food; if at the West, 
flesh, toddy, spirituous liquor, corn and oceanic gems. 


MV PaHTIAUATS Hoang | 
MENA WHAT TRATTA: (2 
Sloka 23.—If it caws looking at the N. W. (Tran- 
quil), one will get weapons, lotuses, fruits of creepers and 
food ; if at the North, milk porridge, horses and clothes. 
karat aenasawial aiereTs | 
° ¢ a ¢ a, 
Ut HS TardTegaaiiagd vata ue 
Sloka 24 —If itcaws looking at the N. E. (Tran- 
quil), one will eat edibles prepared in ghee. He will get 


bulls. Thus, the effects mentioned above accrue to the 
owner of the house, when the crow sits on its roof. 


THT HAAG Mast a BANATa Tala | 
ulagagifa tater, Riad Nee 


Sloka 25.—A crow passing near the ear of a travel- 
ler confers health, but not success in the undertaking ; 
one coming towards him cawing creates obstacles for the 
journey (spoils the journey). 


ara arftrearal chacaiisaarad ara: t 
HATTA, aarlaisatatene NIU 


716 geedtarara, [Adh. XCV. Sl. 27-30. 


Sloka 26.—If a crow caws at first tothe left and 
then to the right of a traveller, his wealth will be stolen ; 
if it is contrariwise, he will get wealth. 


a& ata ay Rrerq agagaaisasiaat: | 
aie waa fer meat ahaaaT | 
Sloka 27.—Ilf a crow caws constantly to the left of 
a traveller and flies in the same direction, his wealth 
will increase; this will happen if it caws even to the 
right in the case of people of the Eastern countries.. 


qa aideraniaery aaa Aasgale | 
TAMAI BS RIAA ATUSHA TAA URI! 


Sloka 28.—-1f a crow caws to the left of a traveller 
and flies in the opposite direction, his journey will be 
hindered. The desired object of a person’s journey is 
indicated by the crow before he sets out. 


alamiaed Heat aiat fearayttaaranth: | 
TATIT GT ANE FARINA Wala RU 


Sloka 29.—If a crow caws at first to the right and 
then to the left of a person, he will obtain his desires; if 
it cries and flies fast in front of him, he will quickly gain 
wealth. 


td 


aaasa Beat zien TTT | zi aasard | 

MHATISHMAT AeIy ge oft Rol 
Sloka 30.—If it flies fast to the right of a person, 
having at first cawed behind him, or if it cawsin front 


looking at the Sun and standing on one leg alone, he 
will soon bleed, | 


Adh. XCV. Sl. 31-35.|  waaafaaatscara: 717 


TEHABTUTET feat alesis | 


qa HAA Hea aqafaaa aar afows 3M 


Sloka 31.—If it scratches with its beak its own fea- 
thers, looking at the Sun and standing in front on one 
leg, then a great massacre of men is indicated. 


aatid Ix Meals qea aTayosa: | 
Mesay Reaq aiaed SapHata: 132A 
Sloka 32.—If the crow caws standing in a ‘ Tran- 
quil’ quarter in a corn-field, one will get lands consisting 
of corn-fields ; if one caws behaving in a disorderly man- 
ner in the border of a village, the traveller will have 
sufferings. 
ahaaBisarHalaagiaagyy | 
adiandimaraaaag aaa 1330 
Sloka 33.—A crow thatis perched on a tree with 
soft leaves, sprouts, flowers and fruits, on a sweet-smell- 


ing tree, one with sweet fruits, a milky one, one without 
holes, or an attractive tree, brings wealth. 


FANTAAAMCSATAMACSFAENAT | 
aaraaReAy a eT qartag: Rw 
Sloka 34.—One cawing from a place of crops, green 
grass, house, temple, mansion or something green, or 
from a blessed, lofty or auspicious place, causes influx of 
wealth. 
Tgtsey aedlnisaat Tat WTR | 
aa sael alert fawala ger Hs ETT UAH 
Sloka 85.—If a crow caws sitting on the tail of a 
cow or on an ant-hill, there will be the sight of a snake ; 


718 grateatara, [Adh. XCV. Sl, 36-40. 


if ona buffalo, one will be attacked by fever the same 
day; if ona bush, the effect is negligible. 


rT SATTATINH AAUSFTTaT aT | 
, A SS 
seqishagesarad FT WK TH ATT Ul 
Sloka 36 —When the crow caws sitting on a heap 
of straw or on water to the left of a person, his business 
will be spoiled by hindrances ; when it is perched on a 


tree whose top is burnt by fireor struck by lightning, 
there will be death. 
mena ara Ate: ate wala Boe | 
mcieia wala Heel Teta aa? Noll 
Sloka 37.—lIf it sits on an auspicious but thorny tree, 
there will be success of the undertaking and quarrel too ; 
if on a thorny tree, there will be quarrel; if on a tree 
entwined with creepers, imprisonment. 
fSaasysse: Bee: Gagataa vay | 
Gta Wal a aaa aay: ici 
Sloka 38.—lf it sits on a tree whose top is chopped 
off, one will be deprived of a limb; if on a withered 


tree, there will be quarrel ; if on cowdung in front of or 
behind a person, he will get money. 


TAFOUPAITAsUTIery Arla ByYAAA | 
aaa a Va aig freTeera*T 11391 


Sloka 39.—One cawing sitting on a limb of a dead 
body causes fear of death. One breaking 4 béne with its 
beak and cawing causes the fracture of the traveller’s bone. 


Tk 
. SMM RaawentaneqgarT lively), 


Adh. XCV. SI. 41-44.] vaaafaaalsvara: 719 


Sloka 40.—If the crow caws holding in its mouth a 
rope, bone, stick, horn, rubbish, and hair, the effects in 
order are fear of serpents, diseases, tusked animals, 
thieves, weapons and fire. 


ba an 


faggargtataaasnayaytaa arg | 
aal gaged 7 ad ge: pols | eel 
Sloka 41.— If it caws holding in its mouth a white 
flower, dirt or flesh, the tourist will achieve his desired 
objects ; # it caws frequently shaking its wings and rais- 
ing its face, his journey wil] be obstructed. 


at segat aat agi Nea aad ara | 
qe Fas eSataRzay lve 
Sloka 42.—If the crow caws holding a chain, strap 
or a creeper, there will be imprisonment ; if it stands on 


a stone, fear and contact with a suffering stranger who 
is travelling. 


HMSeQAQdaladaa AVSrar vate | 

Aaa Stara qeamiAeadgyaag edi 
Sloka 43.—If two crows put some food into the 
mouth of each other, the traveller will have the greatest 


Satisfaction. If a male and a female orow caw simulta- 
neously, he will obtain a damsel. 


AAAS MAW STAASSHAAATATA! | 
AegRA Galtaqaeiseqasaaemiy: vel 
Sloka 44,—If a crow sits on a full pot on the head 
of a damsel, the traveller will get a woman and wealth; 


if it strikes the pot, there will be danger to his son’s life ; 
if it passes excreta pn the pot, he will get food- 


736 qeeaitaraa [Adh. XCV. Sl, 45-49, 


wraaetat HagaAT Vasey | 
TATASHACA Ts MASI WAAAY ivi 
Sloka 45.—If a crow caws beating its wings at the 
time of encampment or making a halting place, change of 
place is indicated ; if it does not shake its wings, there 
will be only fear. 
AO A. A Qa a baa 
MIMS? WeAleiy ATARSAANINT Sais | 
a ANS ¢ ALS 
afegenr wfafesat ye Asda iesil 
Sloka 46.—lf crows enter an army (town or village) 
along with vultures or herons, without carrying meat and 
without fighting with others, one will make peace with 
the enemy ; if they be fighting, there will be war with 
the enemy. 
oN “‘ “ o~ ~~ 
Tas THT TSH aAt Basalt | 
WA GUEy BMI J We lvl 
Sloka 47,—If two crows are seen standing ona hog, 
there will be imprisonment; if on a hog covered with 
silt, gain of wealth; if on a donkey or a camel, happi- 
ness ; but according to some, there will be death, if it is 
on the donkey. 
Teasrasaya erwgafay gaara: | 
AeASTAAIA WAR BATA! 
Sloka 48 —If the crow caws sitting on the Back of 
a horse, one will come by vehicles; if it caws following 
a tourist, he will have his blood spilt. Other birds that 
follow (crying) a traveller, also produce the saine effects 
aé the crow. | 
aisaatad faa aay agtsy | 
qaam fad guatene Bara esi 


Adh. XCV. Sl. 50-54] waaafaantsvara: 72% 


Sloka 49.—Whatever good or bad effects are pre- 
dicted of other omens in the 32 parts of the ‘ Cycle of 
Quarters ’, they are to be applied to the crow as well in 
the case of those that wish to undertake journey. 


Hl Sa RHI VI Bowdaea fens ww | 
wa le Beane Bla va Ravaltaiy: Wott 
a ‘ e A LA 
Hild HIE FESS VW eq Henela aaawyq | 
we ed FF A Tawra asa mE ee 
Slokas 50-51.—lf the crow caws as‘ Ka’ from its 
nest, there is no effect at all; if as‘ Kava’, one will 
get joy; if as ‘Ka’, meet one’s bosom friend; if as 
‘Kara’, there will be quarrel ; if as ‘ Kuru kuru’, joy; 


if as ‘ Kata kata’, one will get curded rice ; If as ‘ Ke ke’ 
or ‘ Ku ku’, the traveller will gain wealth. 
Viat WMATA Barats aWisat gay | 
TAAMAUAHA BAS AASAATUT WAM 
Sloka 52.—The crow producing the sound of ‘Khare 
khare’ indicates the arrival of a traveller; of ‘ Kakha- 


kha’, the tourist’s death ; the sound of ‘a forbids the 
journey ; of ‘ Kakhala’ indicates immediate rainfall. 


SlAa (IITA? HlHella ATI Wes | 
saree BTHAa TeqaT BAKA 421 
Sloka 53,—The crow producing the sound ‘ Kaka’ 
foretells ruim ; ‘ Kakati’, the vitiation of food; ‘ Kava- 
kava’, friendship (making friends with somebody) ; 
* Kagaku ’, imprisonment. 
Seneca is another reading. 


wilt fea at qéaq arava afefa tala: | 
BOW | TANT TRA AGA: GHZ Uv 


q 3 91 : 


722 qeeafearera, (Adh. XCV. SI. 55-58: 


Sloka 54.—If the crow cries as ‘ Karagau’, there 
will be rain; if ‘Guda’, fear; if ‘ Vad’, gain of cloths; 
if ‘ Kalaya’, Sudras will come in contact with Brahmins. 


afefa Gort: saaiteya zig sare: ey: | 
dist: @ifa va aista wat gheta gear neh 
Sloka 55.—If the crow cries as ‘ Kad’, there will be 
the acquisition of the desired objects and the sight of ser. 
pents; if ‘Tad’, one will receive blows; if ‘ Stree’, 
one will get a damsel; if ‘Gad’, cows; if ‘Pud’, flowers. 
Tala wget ae afena HeHe Hae: | 
zigle Favela eens gt ala ciara Weil 
Sloka 56.—If it prcduces the sound ‘ zrH2r ', there 
will be a fight; if ‘ag’, danger from fire; if ‘eee’, 
quarrel. The sounds ‘ z2gi@, tafezia, S¥% and gr’, all 
lead to harmful results, 
PRACT THAT GS Age SAAT: | 
FAAMIFATT GIT Br Tear MAM J W40ll 
Sloka 57.—What effects have been assigned to the 
cry, moments, etc. of asingle crow, equally apply to 
those of two crows also. Other birds tooare to be 
treated on a par with the crow, just as wild animals that 
have tusks above are likened to the dogs. 
wsaisaatnt saat TRS 
AGATA ATH Wal | 
ay SERIE CAC! AHUATY 5) 
MUTA tial Wa AWA Bla Neel 


Sloka. 58 .—When terfestrial” and, aquatic animals 
move in ‘water and oh land respectively inthe tairiy sea- 


Adh. XCV. Sl. 59-61. ] qaaaftadiseqa: 123 


son, there will be abundant rain; but in other seasons, 
there will be danger; bees building their honey-comb 
inside a house, will make it empty soon; blue flies 
clinging to the head bring about death. 


OX PS aN ~ FO ALR ALN 

Mara: Tessas Hahsa shires: | 

TS BAS AMT AAled PaMITT Ta as KaTea seq UI 
Sloka 59,—Ants laying eggs on water bespeak 


drought ; if they carry their eggs froma pit either to a 
tree or an elevated ground, they indicate rain: 
g a bal “. 
eI FT FONFASeasy Ag 
arearans fraaaataa Ararat: | 
ANFATMATATY TAT TAT 
Ma ad a BAt Begala soll 
Sloka 60.—The effect of an undertaking (or journey) 
is to be judged from the initial omen; the effect of one 
occurring in the middle will be felton the same day. In 
this manner all these omens mentioned so far must needs 
be taken into consideration at the commencement of any 
work, and at the time of journeys, as well as of entering 
a new house; but sneezing should be paid special atten- 
tion to, for nowhere is it admitted as a beneficial omen. 


Ua TaTRAAAaS YouUATaTA TELAT | 
Gea daigaaaaed aaita & arataasr Tes 18 211 
Sloka 61,—Good omens indicate the maturing of 
a Dasa in a beneficial manner, accomplishment of the 
objects without obstacles; preservation of the hereditary 
kingdom (or wealth), getting allies, easy subjugation of 
unyieldiag enemies, and enjoying sound health, to a 
sovereign who has faith in them. 


724 geedivararg [XCV..62, XCVI1. 1-2,’ 


raed TEARS Hens ngs 
qanas AAAVHA AAAI Fz | 
MOTTAATATAT TA Near aia 
TAs AAAI ATiasegaras 112 
Sloka 62 —According to some authorities, the cries 
of omens heard after one has gone a Kros (about 2 
miles) have no effect at all. But if the first omen is 
harmful, the king should do eleven Pranayamas; if the 
second too proves evil, he should do 16 Pranayamas, 
and if the third too persists in being malefic, he should 
return home. 
aaa is thus defined. 
asargia annat Wa-1 Paar ag | 
fA: WSzTaAMNl: MoTsaa: A SVIqT tt 


Thus ends the 95th Adhyaya on the “ Cries of Crows”. 


atgalawy Sil Further Omens. 

Omens: Section IX, 
etawacaaTgg IIHT ANT | 
qeiraatslas J FTEAT Halla Waa: 121 

Sloka I.—One conversant with the cries of birds 
and beasts ought to declare the effects of omens only 
after understanding the relative strength of the particular 
quarter, place, movements, sound, the particular week- 


day, asterism, Muhurta, Hora, Karana, the Ascendant, 
its divisions and its being a moveable, fixed or dual signe 


Rind waata draarantiieatasd 3 Bray | 
VCAFAIMA TANG ATAU ATTS AT URN | 


Adh. XCVI, SI..3-5.] . sewafaaatseara: 725 


Sloka 2.—In the case of persons who do not pro- 
ceed on a journey, there are two kinds of the effects of 
omens, viz., the unstable (future) and the stable. To 
the first category belong those pointing to the king, 
envoy, spy, foreign countries, attack (troubles) and kins- 
men. 

(The commentator says stable means past ones and unstable 
future). 

TASARET ATTA CA 
TUAACATTI KoA AT | 

aa: Radsageaegad faa 
fear fae aes a at ag 31 

Slcka 3.—The effect of omens referring to im- 
prisonment, meeting (acquisition), meals, thieves, fire, 
rain, festivities, sons, death, quarrels and fears belong to 
the ‘stable’ category, provided the Ascendant and the 
sign occupied by the Moon at the time are fixed 
signs ; if they are moveable ones, they belong to the 
‘unstable’ category. 


RataiwAeaty quest yISANAT F 
ATT HAN Autor ana Basgiey Araya Vil 


Sloka 4.—The effects are called‘ stable’, when the 
omens occur ina firm place, on a stone, in a house, a 
temple, onthe earth and near water; and when they 
are in moving things, etc. they are called ‘unstable’ or 
* Future’. 


ay TITAMGTASy TATA a3 aaa: | 
Mist F qiatr Saca: TWeasly gS easeT ad Welt 


' Stoka &.—All omens that are situated in an Ascend- 


726 weeaitarary [Adh. XCVI. SIL. 6-8; 


ant happening to be a watery sign (Cancer, Capricorn, 
Pisces), in a watery asterism (Purvashadha, Satabhisha), 
in a watery Muhurta (having the name of water or pre- 
sided over by Varuna), in a quarter presided over by 
Varuna, and ina place where there is water, that occur 
at the end of the fortnights, that are ‘ blasted ° (by Gods 
or by action), and that cry, produce rain. Under the 
same circumstankes, even a ‘ Tranquil’ omen that is 
aquatic causes rain. | 


MAAISATTATATRATIANAAATATT Tia | 
feat qagiqameng fearagig a THq Urq lait 


Sloka 6.—An omen blasted by the Sun and _ posited 
inthe S.E. cornerin a fiery Ascendant (Aries, Leo, 
Scorpio, Capricorn or Aquarius), in a fiery Muhurta, in 
the Krittika asterism, and in a place where fire is kept, 
causes danger from fire, while crying; similarly one 
occurring in Vishti Karana, in a star presided over by 
Yama (Bharani}, ina sign of Saturn happening to be 
the Ascendant and in thorny trees, and on creepers 
without leaves, causes harm. 


Tea welg: acawacaga sry weiss Raa | 
Cc ~ XN A__A 
Tage at wad a raishraaenaera Fes Wl! 
Sloka 7.—A rural bird or beast that is * blasted’ 
by voice or action, that is crying fiercely, that is stand- 


ing ona thorny tree inS. W., in a Lagna owned by 
Mars, and facing a person, leads to quarrel when seen. 


sasaieaiqaigdy Aaudswacay Val 
ala: @ Sq amet Hels sea azar at ARP aieer tcl 


Adh. XCVI. SI. 9-11.],  waweftrasitseara: 727 


Sloka 8.—Or, when the creature cries with its face 
hung down, standing in a corner and in a Navamsa of 
Venus happening to be rising or occupied by the Moon, 
and being ‘blasted’ (in place or sound), the person 
will get a woman of the type assigned to the particular 
corner. 

FIistAISTAATMCIN AAqI2E : i another reading, 

The meaning will be “he will meet some-body that is 
assigned to that quartet and who happens to go along the 
same ik . 


qigea fia fat a Raa: adig: agal aurea: | 
ase Gat aRIT aunt ar Mag TeRataais: <I 
Sloka 9.—An omen that is ‘ Blasted’ and posited in 
a male Ascendant, inan odd Tithi and in a cardinal 
quarter is termed ‘Masculine’. In this case one. will 


come in contact with men; if it is mixed, 7 e.in a male 
sign and in an even Tithi, he will meet eunuchs. 


ad TH: BTaataaa a7 aa at aang a | 
Axa ba’ “ ASA © Laws ® 
SIUSTATT WHAT (ACMA FA WATTS le BT aT 12 oll 

Sloka 10.—If an omen that is * Blasted ' cries, when 
the Ascendant or its Navamsa is owned by Sun or when 
the Sun himself is in the Ascendant, the arrival of an 
eminent personage is indicated. 

THTaAg 4 TTRTACTH AAT RTRMA fraay | 


~ be, ton 


UTGEGA AMMAN ALTSIAA TMT Tear 1221! 


Sloka 11:—At the commencement of any work, 
count the distance in signs from the one occupied by the 
Sun to the Lagna in the manner of ‘ Weal’ and ‘ Woe’ 
in order. Accordingly, wealth or misery will have to be 
predicted. 


728 aguedivererg [Adh. XCVI. Sh 12-13. 


If the Lagna is an odd number from the Sun’‘s Rasi, it is 
good; if even, bad. 
BTA TINA Al Aes SUIT TTA Wary | 
VUVISH WIessey aq gear aa aragiat AN ar Le 
BU WY weal Home aay Wal WEF Asal 
Ud Wh WAT TeaHlS FE eI Taiag iyeaq_ lt 

Slokas 12-13.—If the Sun is posited in the 12th 
place from the Lagna at the time, the person whom one 
will meet will be blind of the right eye; if the Moon be 
there, he will be blind of the left eye; if the Sun be in 
the Lagna itself and be aspected by malefics, he will be 
completely blind. If the Sun in the above condition be 
in his own Rasi, he will be htnch-backed, deaf or an 
imbecile. If the 6th house from the Lagna be occupied 
and aspected by malefics, the person will have ulcer in 
the limb indicated by that sign. In this- way, whatever 
marks or forms (colours) have been expounded by me 
in connection with the time of births will have to be 
adopted here too. 

This shows clearly that Brihatjataka was written first and 
then only this book. 

STAISSTACAISAITIAATA: Hla | TASS Taews 
negetaanranasmiaeaga ARaMatat aarvarrHaaeancara 
Ssqreqaa- 

aa: 9¢ stafrefiarta aeaq arracagentsr | 

worn faafhata arnfa hegeaa: VET UU 


1. Hereafter I shall explainin the order of the Kendras 
the names that are held by the objects Sf the world, viz., mineral, 
vegetables and animais with multifarious distinctions made a 
wil and composed of various syllables. 


Adh. XCVI. Sl. i quoaqiaaaistata: 799 
So far Yavaneswara has been treating ef the method of 
guessing the query. 


aarqdeareata:ftaag aay 7 Sanat Weta: | 
aralsatoareagersaany fararaaat ETHAN RII 


2. The syllables belonging to the signs in accordunce with 
their respective classes of sounds will have to be gathered from 
the Navamsas of the signs signifying the Lagna, the 4th, the 7th. 
and the 10th houses. 


maga Sagaafestaaaat saafea ais | 
aartgal: ahaa fae antecasieraar Wa: Eg: AM 


3. The guttural, palatal. lingual, dental and labial class of 
consonuuts belong severally to Mars, Venus, Mercury, Jupiter and 
Saturn; the eight letters beginning with 4-ya belong to the Moon 
and the vowels to the Sun. 


R-alaen vaca are frosamiaaratan | 
y7q q faeana fgaacees array nee feagy: isi 


4. The number of letters constituting a name is to be de- 
duced from tbe decanate that is rising. In an odd sign, the 
numbers will be three, five and seven respectively, in tie frst, 
second and third decanates; and in an even sign, they will in 
order be 2,4 and 6. They are also ascertained from the strength 
of the aspect of planets. 


antaa aa ait fea aqwat aq | 
aay Seal Asana egigearag gq afi us 


5. If the Vargottama Navamsa of a Rasi be signified by an 
even and a moveable one, the name consists of two syllables; if 
by an even and at the same time a fixed sign, four syllables, If the 
Vargottama Navamsa be an odd as well as a moveable Kasi, 
there will be three letters; if by a fixed sign, five. If the Lagna 
be a dual sign, the name will consist of as many letters as corres- 

‘pond to the number signified by the Rasi (when counted, from 
Megha). 
q- gi 92 


730 geeattarata [Adh. XCVI. S): 12+13:. 


IT EO ee a oa aaa eeentaennateiebaeemnetmnamnenteneenammmeanenenmteeneememniannmmnaaae PELE LED ALT TBE ELE PLEO NS ETE TLE GS EEL ED, 


fgafaara q aaafgara aarea anata cat | 
Aa A: CasaNiaAHral Aa He: HASRSATIONA Ne |) 


6. In the case of a dual sign, two names will have to be 
declared; when it is aspected by benefics, then too, the same 
result. The particular Navamsa rising at the time, gives the 
number of letters constituting the name. 


daiamal agay farana seg datas aatea | 
asin Renaamainaqant aaaaigh cag iol 


7. If the rising sign be odd, the name will begin with a 
conjunct consonant; if an even one, with a letter followed by a 
conjunct consonant. When the planet (contributing a letter to 
the name) is posited in his highest exaltation, the letter is repeated 
according to the nature of the particular sign (odd or even); a 
name will have a long syllable J% in the particular place signified 
by the Navamsa rising at the time. 


SIX, ait, TAT are the examples for the first. Wa, wa, 4gazu, 
etc. for the second ; if odd. <cz, ayaizt, if even, T4xX4, WT etc. 


maeae carne feanitt scaqnoqalaaaeitg | 
AMA TARS_AG Ta Aaatseaserfatgq cl 


8. When the 5th or the 9th house is occupied by planets, 
there will be an extra syllabic instant in the name in the legter 
signified by the decanate. When the 10th house is strong, there 
will be the upper sign of long syllable; when the 4th, lower sign; 
when the 7th, a Visarga. 


alisigageagafea aiataga apiqaafeaig | 
faa a faeangaaed at dig Galftatg wea ien 


9, When a Seershodaya Rasi is rising, the ala (syllable 
instant) will be upwards; when it is a Prishtodaya one, the 
aiat will be downwards, In the case of & dual sign rising, it is 
across ;, when it is a long sign, there is along sylable; when 
it is medium or short, it will be short. 


Adh, XCVI, Sl. 12-13.]  womarfdaaitseara: 731 


\ 
sianaareata:featg asagkealsavane: cad | 
aiisat effa aazaeal esarft arat a Pata at 11 ol 


10. The letters of a name are contributed by the Navamsas 
of the signs that are the Ist, 4th, 7th and 10th houses. A 
malefic posited in a Kendra house destroys a syllable, while 


in a triangular one, destroys a Alaq!l. The same result will arise 
even by aspect- 


qamerdiadt Fart caatgaeaeaa: @ ae: 
agaq feaa: eahrarraal eaesli aoigamerary 1% th 


11. A strong benefic is said to contribute as many syllables 
as the Navamsas travelled by him; or when he is posited in a 
Kendra, Kona, in his exaltation or own Navamsa and aspects the 
Lagna, he gives two letters. 


Aart aladsak 3 araat arqaafa as | 
aeeaiscgaaia qfaa anlagatagaaes 1220 


12. When the lord of the sign rising aS also its Navamsa 
are weak, the syllabic instant ara! as well as ‘the syllable caused 
by that is destroyed; still, inits stead, the first letter of the 
Particular class comes into being provided the said lord is posited 
in the Navamsa that is owned by his exaltution sign and the 
Navamsa Rasi aspected by its own lord (or, and aspected by the 
lord of that Rasi or Navamsa Rasi ?) 


hea queMATegHY Aata acaasaay Tgl 
SACI SANUIL ET CCINIMEIECGCIUIC ERO TREC MRE TT 


13. The order of the letters as well as ‘the existence of the 
Matras, conjunct consonants at the beginning or the end should 
‘be fixed only after ascertaining fully the extent of the positional 
strength of the Kendra house and its lord. 

aaierreatagenaraaanrtaaoy | 
agighey: eanoreroarasa fata fanal we ei 


732 geedi@arata [Adh, XCVI. SI 12-13. 


14. In reconstructing a name, the method to be adopted is 
the following: Take the four Kendras begimning with the first 
sign (4. e, Aries, Cancer, Libra and Capricorn) and their Navam- 
sas in regular order for the first; then take the letters of the 
classes belonging to the respective planets owing to. their position 
in the Navamsas identical with the above ones, | 


ay Hay fegh aes at Aa GAIT | 
AY gary feghscantegs Gal Ta HHT: VM 


15. .When the first Navamsa of Mesha is rising, the letter 
ism ; for Karkataka, the 4th,a; for Tula, the 7th,a; for 
Makara, the 10th, 7; similarly for the second Navamsas of these 
four, the letters indicated are in order 3, 4, @ and &. 


[It has been explained above thatthe letters are to be deduced 
from the Navamsas of the Ist, 4th, 7th and 10th houses according 
to their being owned by the several planets. Now when Mesha 
happens to be rising, the first Navamsas of this and the other 
Kendras are respectively Mesha, Kataka, Tula and Maleara. These 
are owned by Mars, the Moon, Venus and Saturn respectively. 
Since they are the first Navamsas, we have to take the first letters 
of the classes belonging to the planets, 77z. 47, 4, F7 and ¥. When 
the second Navamsas of Mesha, Kataka, etc are rising, the letters 
will be for the same reason the second letters of the respective 
classes, according to their ownership; 2g. in Mesha, the 2nd 
Navamsa belongs to Venus, so the second letter of aqaqd i¢., 8 and 


so on.] 


AY aay fegh saegs asl AKU IH: | 
AY gq VA gh AAETS THY ARC THT UE 


16. When the 3rd Navamsa of Mesha is rising, the letter 
for it is Z; for the fourth house Karkataka, itis 3; for the seventh 
Tula, a; for Makara, it is 4; for.the 4th Navamsa of Mesha, 
Kataka, fula and Makara, they are respectively <, 4» 7 and 7. 


{Though the Navamsa is the 3rd, still the letter taken, is the 
first of the class z, it is the first time that Mercury gets his chance.] 


Adh. XCVI. SI. 12-13.] senraiaaatseara: 733 


Ye . ss 
MAAN THTACT ABIL THT AH | 
BA SHE fATh THEA THI TH TAIT Voll 
17, When the 5th Navamsas of Mesha is rising, the letters 
for the four houses are HI, 7, 4 and @ respectively ; similarly for 
the sixth Navamsas of these 4 houses, the letters are in order 
Ss, Z, J and @. 
BU ABT Rah AMT Gs SHY AHL SHIT | 


ON Ha fash WHEAS BH Ta FHT: IE CII 
18. When the 7th Navamsa of Mesha is rising, the letters 
for the four Kendras houses are, 4, S. and @ respectively; for 
the 8th Navamsa, the corresponding letters are 4, 4, @ and x& 
respectively. 


wiq watt fegh anege Hy AHL SHIT: | 


HAAQM BeeAKeA sey fEatiwaEa AQEaeT 117 II 


19, When the °th Navamsa of Mesha is rising, the letters 
for the four Kendras are respectively 4, 4, and Zz. Thus have I 
explained the letters for the Kendras that are moveable signs. 
Now I shall explain the same for those that are fixed signs. 


ay HE fags GH: ale aa PE TH: | 


saiaeeal afanifeaceqiggnag featdstg 1% of 
20. When the first Navamsa of Vrishabha is rising, the 
letters for the four Kendras are %, @, Tand #8. In this manner, 
are to be got the letters for the first Navamsas, in regular order, of 
the fixed signs by a wise man. 


ON aay fags Aare: FHACAS HAT TAIT: | 
aN asl fege ent: HE SHY DA THT Re I 


21. When the second Navamsa of Taurus is rising, the 
letters for the four Kendras are 4, 3, ¥ aud 7; for the third 
Navamsas of these, the letters are 4, Z, © and 7 respeotively. 


aT HY fags ate: He AHI TIE FHI: | 
BWA HH gh SH: He SHY BE Ag: WAM 


734 qeedtararg, [Adh. XCVI.'S1, 12-13. 


22. When the 4th Navamsa of Vrishabha is rising, the 
letters for the four Kendras are 4,3, Hand 4; for the fifth 
Navamsa, the correspouding letters arc @, 3, %, and &. 


SHA SHUS] AS YRCIEA THNYSHAT FHT: | 
TY amie fegh Far: we HY sae HAI: RAN 


23. When the 6th Navamsa of Vrishabha is rising, the letters 
for the four Kendras are @, %, 4 and 4; for the 7th Navamsa, 
¥, 4, 1 and & respectively. “ 


GRUNT FS GHA HHI TE SFT: | 
areeQ ah tagged fae 4 aad s yaafeq Bed ARM 
24. When the 8th Navamsa is rising, the letters for the four 


Kendras are &, @, % and & respectively; for the 9th Navamsa, 
they are 2, d, 4 and @ respectively. 


faafiae faga aan: 98 aa: santa cara | 
aautsedad na Magy awe GAIT RAN 


25, When the first Navamsa of Mithuna, a dual sign, is 
rising, the letters for the Kendras.are 4, 4, 7 and 4 respectively. 


ara anil fag waitated ansraTaeaT F | 
era aad faq aartaed sant agent FREI 


26. When the second Navamsa of Mithuna is rising, the 
lettters for the Kendras are 9,4, & and & respectively; for the 
3rd Navamsa, they are z, 4, © and @ respectively. 


aa mal fegh eared entisat aa: | 
BY HT Aol AHIT VHTAASA HHT: RII 


27. When the 4th Navamsa of Gemini is rising, the ‘letters 
for the four Kendras are H, $, € and @ respectively; for the 5th 
Navamsa, they are J, 4, @ and 4. 


oremy 4 nel qarewed aa 2 aaa fad a | 
isrerat @ wea -qargeed aa Ss Aa ae HA UR Ci 


Adh. XCVI, SI]. 12:13.] worsftadtseara: 436; 


28. When the 6th Navamsa of Gemini is rising, the letters 
for the Kendras are @, %, 2 and @ respectively; for the 7th 
Navamsa, they are U,.4, 8 and & respectively. 


aia aAAaqGeY TAEa Ged fagiear ay t 
d araitseea feanifa @ aneat ¢ aqfiftat 3 wren 
29. When the 8th Navamsa of Gemini is rising, the letters 


for the Kendras are 4, 3, 7 and 4 respectively; for the 9th 
Navamsa, they are 3, 8, 4 and Z respectiuely. 


vq faredisatmenelsa ara faeefaara ae: | 
aag arg 3 Sfgafisaies qatefiaaad Rol) 


30. Thus has been explained the given method of gathering 
the letters constituting names. Some sages have thus opiged as 
given above for all the signs rising at the time. 

Cn 
Seaifey at Reguaigh: &: qagren agiarf aaa | 
faafgass fagtat aq Aaccainaiaaqerw 12 Ul 


31. Or, multiply separately the :everal Kendra houses by: 
their corresponding rising Navamsas and divide the result by. 9 . 
The quotient will reveal the letter required belonging to the Na- 
vamsa of the planet. 


Hq | TF (fag, ez fae 


| BEYl 


| 
eicilalaialalalalalalesla 
eialiagijalalwalalgl/alsials 
~;H7izglis jz i/alaysljetlasizgis 
tclalala,;alelatalgil[alala 
aiaiqia [a |e|s Gia al #. 
Z;eti aye |a eS a,e ¢ | Fa 
l T)/ ala | a af S\l¢ sa 
e Siwlq /alawi~elsial gis w 
Tyezetl;esala 24 a oe 


736 _ geeaftararg, [Adh. XCVI. S). 14-15 


H 


[Multiply the number representing the sign of each Kendra 
house by the number of its Navamsas (owned by the planets) and 
divide the product by nine; the remainder gives a particular 
Navamsa, from whose lord the letter is to be deduced. 

Suppose Mesha to be rising; then multiply 1 by the Navamsas 
contained init, #.c. 6, (the nine Navamsas being owned by six pla- 
nets) and divide by 9, thus; 1X6 +9. ae remainder is 6. The 
letter indicated will be that of Mercury, #.¢. = and so on.] 


afaPaasfiafiag asaaetfanaag 
eacaatfaratgerfaaisaay AmegISaaq7 NAR 


32. One ought to find out the names in connnection with the 
following things: (1) Things thought of (2) things wished for (3) 
departures ; (4) lost objects, (5) damaged things, (6) women; (7) 
sports (8) dishes (or food) (9) dreams (10) stars (It) cares and 
(12) men ; and so on from the four Kendras in order. 


The commentator interprets the 12 subjects beginning with 
ufzaterd (thought of) as referring to the ¢ Kendras from the Lagna 
in order, in three sets of 4 each; +z. ¢., the names of t.umbers 
1, 5 and 9 should be deduced from the Lagna Kendra: those of 
2, 6 and 10 from the fourth Kendra; those of 3, 7 an! 11 from the 
7th Kendra; and those of 4,8 and 12, from the 10th Kendra. 


Here ends Yavaneswara'’s Akshara Kosa- 


DAC WIAA AA AA TATAt faz | 
aaa q feqlay stat wala are ait uit 
Sloka 14.—If at the time of a query or some 
body’s arrival the rising sign (or Navaimsa) is moveable, 
the name of the person concerned will consist of two 
syllables; if itis a fixed one, four syllables; ifa dual 
Rasi, he will have a double name, of which the first will 
have 3 syllables and the second 5. 


alae Tal: gaaRdieadiasarat waa: Ae | 
ques wie gay AE ATs Ts | lel 


Agh, XCVI. SI. 16-17.) dinefsadistara: 7137 


qua qpearaganasyaatalaaaaay | 
qeans aatq waa Aiea ieanitactGeteager (1 


Slokas 15-16.—The guttural, palatal, lingual, dental 
and labial classes respectively belong to Mars, Venus, 
Mereury, Jupiter and Saturn; the eight letters begin- 
ning with “@’ to the Moon ; and the vowels from ‘#’, to che 
Sun. .Kor the planets beginning with the Sun (owning 
the rising sign or Navamsa), the names will be synony- 
mous with thase of Fire, Water, Subrahmanya, Vishnu. 
Indra, Sachi and Brahman respectively, and they will 
have to be reconstructed as consisting of two, three, 
.fqur or five syllables, by one's own intelligence. 


[A strong planet will havea ‘tall’ syllable, (such as a!) one 
of medium strength, a short one (such as %); and a weak one, a 
:sdownward syllable. About the allotment of syllables, some hold 
that for every 150 minutes traversed by the Sun in the sign 
.accupied there should be one syllable belonging to him for the 
first letter of the name; for every 225’, in the Moon; and for 
every 200 in other planets.] 


TA Aat WMaTATeTAMe TM AAAASTTTI: | 
ART IS HA VRAMITSA ATRIA 2911 
Sloka 17.,—The age of persons will have to be as- 
certained from the planets, the Moon, Mars, Mercury, 
Venus» Jupiter, the Sun and Saturn, as that of a baby fed 
by breast-milk, a child (between 2and 6 years), a celi- 
bate (7 to 16 years), a youth (17 to 30), a middle-aged 
person (fom 31 to 50 years), an old man (51 to 80 years) 
and a,very,old man (81 to 100 years) respectively. 


Thus ends the 96th Adhyaya on “‘ Further Omens ”’, 


seen ERE 


¥.% 93. 


“738 — eedfteraa, [Adh. XCVITE. Si t-4, 


TRTSATT R911 On the Time of Fruition of Effects. 


“quran aa ateisyTRE aR I. 

| MATS Wa TTA Str Thor 11211 
aig: fae aiereta oar geiaiisearaig | 
ana aint aa: ara qeMteRT WN 
ita qaaataa: ware TAIT | 
AMERaayraaseawTa AT UN. 


Sloka 1-3—The effects—good or bad—accruing 
from the transit of the Sun, the Moon, -Mars, Mercury, 
Jupiter, Venus, Saturn and Rahu and from Solar eclipse 
Twashtru, Tamasa Keelaka, a dusky comet, a white 
comet, misty haloes round the Sun and the Moon, Rain- 
bow, twilights and shapes of clouds will come to pass 
within the period noted against each as shown below : 


Time of Fruition. 


Sun — 15 days. Rahu — 6 months. 


Moon — 1 month. Solar Eckpse —~ ] year. 
Mars — Period (see Twashta -—~ Same day. 
Adhyaya VI, Tamasa 
supraytaken Keelaka -~- Same day, 


for his retroe Dusky comet — 3 monte: 
grade motion. White comet — 1 week. . 


Mercury’ — Before his dis Halos — 1 week, . 
appearance. Rainbows — 1 week. 

Jupiter —- 1} year. : Twilight’ — 1‘week. | 

Venus ' -—- 6 months, Shapes of. . 

Saturn —lyear, — clouds _ 1 wae. 


diarentaqata: Ragansion tat ate | 
faraaeaed saatsa waa nen 


Adh. XCVII. Sl. 5-8.] e@aweftazitsearq: | 739 


Bloka 4.—The effects of the reversal of the tempe- 
rature of hot and cold things (or seasons), the appearance 
of flowers and fruits out of season, burning of quarters, 
the reversal of the states of moving and fixed objects and 
abnormal births, will come to pass in six months. 


ARAMTHRT YRASAAT GRE Tl 
argrarcarnt aralseaet | TINT UI 


 Sloka 5.—-Things being done without an agent, 
earthquake, stoppage of festivities, terrible calamities, ' 
withering or drying of never-drying things and streams 
refusing to flow or flowing upwards, these effects will 
be felt in half a year. 


| Mtagasrtiat qerastaratraacn: | 
Bara Raeecaraagiansey vst 


Sloka 6.—The effects of pillars, granaries, images, 
speeches, weeping, quaking, sweating, quarrels, rainbows, 
and portentous thunder will be felt in three months. 


Mergataraaged zategiied | 
Sea ag aol falses asaa ares t9it 


Sloka “7.—The effects of the pests, viz., worms, ” 
rats, flies and snakes, of the cries of beasts and birds, 
and of the floating of clods of earth.in water will be felt 
in three months alone. 

a BARAT aeaTat arreTETT | 
agheaatercaaia atte aaerst tell 

Sloka 8.—'Thé effects of bitches bringing forth their ' 
young ones in the forest, the entry of wild animals into’ 
the village, beehives, arches and Indra’s banner. will be 
feltzin a year or a little more, - 


7A: “ deedfigaterty  ERCVIL, oa. 


ee aed? 
MBE Tans aaaiar fart az qa: le 


Sioke. 9.—Groups of jackals arid vultures make’ thei 
effects felt in ter days ; the sound of musicad inetraments 
(when beaten,.no sound appearing, and when: not. beaten 
sound appearing), the very same day; imprecations, 
sudden appearance of ant-hills in a house, and bursting 
of the earth, in a fort-night. 

HYAAISATA Fadwaisaaey BAe | 
MH TIS T HIST | THAT: For 

Sloka 10.—The effects of flames appearing without 
the existence of firé, the showér of ghee, oil, fat ard the 
like, come to pags on the same day; and of utterances 
of people, in a month and a half. 


safaaqigaredionat amaaata ay | 
SH TNS FT VPI CHS. ATE! lek Lit 
Sloka 11,—The effects of royal umbrellad, sabtificial 
altars, sacrificial posts, fire and seéds will come to pass in 
7 fortnights ; but some hold that those of umbrellas and» 
atches will be felt in a month, 


seraiegiat ae: wag Fatt yar | 
BCC ORCC MILEL) 

Sloka R,—The effects of friendship between deadly 
enemies, sounds of animale in the sky and sexgal union 
of the cat or the mungoose with the rat will eome 
to pass in a month. : 


aeoigt simretetl eight = 
eae A agen eral seen wea: 


Adi. MCVIE. Sh 1427] eewaftesiiscara: 74%. 


Sistia 13:—The effect of aerial cities, suddemctange 
of taste-of artieles, discolouration of gold, flags, Hheuses: 
artd! the quarters filled with dust or: smoke: will be. felt in: 
a month. ; 

TARRCTTR HILAR ABACTATATSNT | 
ATUOT UATE AUB UI 

Sloka.14.—The eight asterisms beginning: with. As- 
wini make their effects. felt in nine, one, eight, ten, one, 
six, three and three months respectively and Aslesha, 
the same day. 


fisqieates ye y2 Tass a AeRe | 
ATATRSTNS TAITHALT INT Lait 


Sloka 15.—The twelve asterisms beginning with 
Magha make their effects. felt in one month, six months, 
six months, three months, half a month, eight months, 
three months, six months, one month, one month, six 
months and six months respectively; and Abhijit, the 
same day. | 

AURA TRA. WAT GAT: TT! | 
wrdtat Tal Taal TeHaETE LE 

Stoka 16.—The asterisms beginning with Sravarne 
make their effects felt in seven, eight, one and a half, : 
three, three and five months respectively. 

LTRe portents whose times of frution have not been mentioned 
here are mentioned in Sloka 30 of Adhyaya 37 sapre.] 


fraftaaay a est Schreat Gage | 

ata SASUAM AT hein a 1 
‘Sloka 17.—If the effects of the portents': saestioned 

abowa do jade come to paes at the time fixed, dhey wilde, 


742° qeeditararay [Adh. XCVIII. Si. 1-5, 


so, with greater vehemence at double the time, if they are 
net syarded off by expiatory ceremonies performed ac- 
cording to, the precepts of the Sastras by Brahmins along 
with gifts of gold, gems and cows. 


Thus ends the 97th Adhyaya on ‘‘ The time of Fruition of 
Effects”. 


TREATY Sci! On the Functions and 
Properties of the Asterisms. 


fiaqaarzaracaintayqasaaagian: | 
Prdnsexqaiattientargeeat: eH 
rural rises aay | 
 mAaSPaeATaat RIVA MAATT UA 
AGATYAE HSASANBNAT ATA | 
feadeize aah sarserqa aT aeas NR 


Slokas 1-3.—The number of stars constituting the ° 
constellations from Aswini are 3, 3, 6, 5, 3,1, 5, 3,6, 5, ° 
8, 15,5, 1, 1, 5, 4, 3, 11, 2, 8, 3, 5, 100 15, 8 and 32 
respectively, The periods also of these constellations 
are represented by the mumber of stars. The effect— 
good or bad—of an asterism on marriage will come to 
pass in as many years as there are stars in it. A fever 
or some other illness will disappear in so many days, 


aaaganratatgeucterahiannteay | 
Tasaarpeasraaaanay lel 
aat Prafiard Ar wer edad | 


merrraishegern: cor Yelarce aren tat. 
Slokas. 4-5, The ‘presiding deities of the ‘a8: astes 
tisms.beginning with Aswini..are ,in their order, ‘divind:. 


‘Adh. XCVIIL'S1. 6.8.) wewaftesiiavata: 193 


physicians, the God of Death, Fire, the Creator, the 
Moon, Rudra, Aditi, Jupiter, Serpent, the Manes, Bhaga, 


. Aryaman, Savita, Twashta, the .Wind, Indragni, Mitra, 


Indra, Nirriti, Apah; Visvedevas, Brahman, Vishnu, 


Vasu, Varuna, Ajaikapat, Ahirbudhnya and Pushan. 


ategaatt teat Titer yanks a: ga } 
ufaraaitansrneadaisareary ug! 


Sloka 6.—Among the 28 constellations, the four, 
via. , the three Uttaras and Rohini are called Dhruva or 


. fixed ones, Coronations, expiatory ceremonies). -planting 


of trees, laying the foundation of towns, commencement 


_ of meritorious deeds, sowing seeds and other. permanent 


things should be undertaken when the Moon passes 


_. through these asterisms. 


™ 
Fe 


qoRMaRgaMeaTy tents ty era) 


WMATA ASTTTTATT TEA: (N91 
Sloka 7.—The asterisms Mula, Ardra, . Jyeshta and 


Aslesha are known as Teekshna or sharp. During , these 


succeed attacks, incantations, raising of goblins, im- 


_prisonment of others, murders, separation of friends and 


alliance with kings and the like. 


All infernal il nefarious acts succeed when these state rule. 
SHIA TaaetTsTEqeATAT TTS | 
Qeait wateeaaqaraneg F fer lic 


Sloka 8.— The five asterisms, vtz., three’ Purvas, 
(Purvaphalguni, Purvashadha and Purvabhadra), Bharani 


‘and Magha are termed’‘Ugra’ or dreadful, These 
ate to'be used with success in ruining enemies, destruc- 


tion, -deceit, imprisonment, poisoning, setting fire and 


“triking: with: weapons.and the like. 


eames Ach, CHIR A 


wg Terragen: weNdEA IMT RATY A 
‘Rretivraraity fete arenas 
‘Sloka 9.—The asterisms Hasta, Aswini and ‘Buéhya 
“(ABhijit alsd) are termed ‘fara’ or swift. “They ‘are 
beneficial in trade, sensual pleasures, education, ornamen- 
tation, fine arts, skilled labour, medical ‘treatment, jour- 
ney and the like. 


—— es frais | 
quiaiianqmageaiag a fant 2 eit 


‘Sloka 10.—The four asterisms Anuradha, ‘Chitra: 
"Revati ard 'Mrigasiras are known to belong to the «class 
of “Tender” ones: These yield beneficial results .-in 
“~midfeing friends, sexual union, use of garments and :erna- 
ments, performance of auspicious ceremonies and singing. 
MAMAN TERA ALTA HER 

‘Bloka‘11.—The two asterisms Krittika and “Visakha 
are known as Wgdtet —Tender-sharp and give mixed 
results, “The five asterisms Sravana, Dhanishta, “Sata- 


bhishak, Punarvasu and Swati are termed 4% Chara 
or ‘ Temporary ’ and are good for ephemerdl‘things. 
CUI BAM: AITTT 
guibramgeatia yaaa | 
Gig Sh Rages gh ar 
Pa Wea BAIT AULA 
i Sloka:iL2—+The asterisms .recommended for shave 
“wane id sta, Chitraz Swati, Mrigasisas, Sravaag, Dhanighta, 
‘Ga tébbishak) Revati, deswini, Jyeshta,.Peshya-aqad, Pagar: 
vasu- It is to be hadssthen ‘these asteriams.nige, .arayen 


Adh. XCVIII.'S), 13.15.] eewafatadiseara: 745 


the Muhurtas bearing the names of the deities presiding 
over them rise, when the Moon is auspicious, 7. ¢., in 
conjunction with the Ist, 3rd, 6th, 7th, 10th or 11th 
with respect to the Janma Rasi, and also when therc is 
favourableness of the asterism, 7. e., 2nd, 4th, 6th or 8th. 


a araMTAAARERA TAT: 
ATRYRUTR SATA AT | 
ASAT TAM HART a fe 
at aa 4 aaaste a aie Agar ura 
Sloka 13.—A shave does not lead to good results, 
if had soon after bath, just before starting on a journey, 
after decorating oneself, anointing oneself with oil for 
bath, eating food, at the time of war, without a seat, at 
a juncture (dawn, evening, or mid-day), at night, on 
Saturdays, Tuesdays and Sundays, in Rikta Tithis (4th, 
Oth, 14th), on a day 9th from that of the previous shave 
and in Vishti Karana. 
INIT TATA @ las Bas | 
Tze Hy watiguig aly Te geay Fy een 
Stoka 14 —Shave is good: in any asterism, if it is 
done by a royal mandate, by Brahmins’ advice, on the 
oceasion of a marriage, during pollution caused by death, 
at the release from prison, and at the time of the solemn 
resolution to perform sacrifices. 


Bel Ys MAM GaagaafaTTT ges: | 


gafsaag areqaia gaits Pecans ue 

Sloka 15.—When the Moon travels through the 
asterisms’ Hasta, Moola, Sravana, Punarvasu, Mriga- 
sirsha and Pushya, it is*auspicious for doing all actions 
that are termed’ or tend towards ° male ’, 


This Sloka ‘is nt fyund in some editions. 
a. & 94, 


746 geeaigarary [XCVIII. 16-17, XCIX, 1. 


~ A ba) ~ 
aaaTtonirowracreas aa seas | 
MENT ATT FAR YReVegTw N24 
Sloka 16.—Sacraments, undertaking a religious act 
such as a sacrifice, observance of a vow, tying the sacred 
girdle (¢. e., Upanayana) and such other things should be 
performed on a Thursday, Friday, Wednesday or 
Monday, when the Moon is in conjunction with any of 
the asterisms, Hasta, Revati, Swati, aurea Pushyas 
Chittra and Mrigasiras. 


Vasicqaearqage: walsrgrar- 
Q ba’ he’ x 
SA HeATASTT BTU CUeTsashy 7 | 
aalteanenataect Ua Fae Ya 
AIETAMAA FATT BA TATISAY aT R91 
Sloka 17.—All undertakings are crowned with suc- 
cess when the 12th, 8th and the Kendra houses are un- 
contaminated (occupied by benefics and without malefics) 
the malefics in the 3rd, 6th or the 11th, and Jupiter or 
Venus in the Lagna or ina Kendra. A house should be 
constructed or entered when the Lagna at the time is 
beneficial to the owner (7. e-, when it does not happen to 
be the 12th or 8th from his Janma Rasi) and happens to 
be a rural as well as a fixed sign. 


Thus ends the 98th Adhyaya on the “ Functions and Proper- 
ties of the Asterisms,”’ 


fafaagqrg &Stl On the Functions and 
Properties, of Tithis or Lunar days. 


anvaiedehengagTeteaaTtggaT: | 
qdgaftaaenaneal AA a fafaTaas eh 


Adh, XCIX, Sl. 2-3.] gatesraaats<ara: 747 


fravisarararat dqraeary a: Prat: Brat: | 

aeat vat Asn fear cat a ahaha: zh 

qa AAA deaana Afyy aenray | 

BUTE TAT aq fatgat taaaeay VI 

Slokas 1-3.— The lords of the lunar days are in their 

order: Brahman, Vidhata, Vishnu, Yama, the Moon, 
Subrahmanya, Indra, the Vasus, Serpent, Dharma, 
Rudra, Aditya, Manmatha, Kali and the Visvedevas ; 
those of the New Moon are the Manes. Functions ap- 
propriate to the deities must be performed on their res- 
pective days. These are further divided into five classes 
of 3 days each. 1,6 and 11—Nandas; 2, 7 and 12— 
Bhadras ; 3,8 and 13—Jayas; 4, 9 and 14—Rikthas ; 
and 5, 10 and 15—Purnas. Works that are prescribed for 
the several asterisms should be done on the lunar days 
that are owned by the same deities. In the same way, 
they should be done with reference to the Karanas and 
Muhurthas by the identity of the presiding deities for 
ensuring success. 


On the Ist Tithi Brahminic ceremonies such as 
marriage may be performed; on the 2nd, laying 
foundation for houses, etc.; on the 3rd, tonsure, 
etc; on the 4th, destruction of enemies may be under- 
taken ;+ on the 5th, emetics, tonics, etc.; on the 6th, 
getting new friends, coronation, etc; on the 7th, con- 
struction of vehicles, journey, etc.; on the 8th, taking up 
of arms, fortification, etc.; onthe 9th, ruining and 
killing enemies ; on the 10th, meritorious . deeds, worship 
_of Brahmins, ne - on the 11th, permanent and tempo- 
“rary delicate work; on the 12th, fire-worship; on the 
13th, making friendship, enjoyment of sensual pleasures, 


%48 - geedfearara = [Adh. C. SI. f. 


etc.; on the 14th, administration of poison, mercury, etc.; 
on the 15th, propitiation of the Manes. 


According to Parasara, all the 15 Tithis have separate 
names a8 aa1, Wal, Far, Ra, qo, ara, fa, aeraer, eae, 
Gul, Gaez1, AA, Wal, Al and fais. Since Rohini and Pratipat 
have the same presiding deity Brahman, all Brahma Karmas 
should be performed on a day that has both Rohini and Pratipat. 
Similarly 2nd and Abhijit; 3rd and Sravana; 4th and Bharani; 
5th and Mrigasiras; 6th and Krittika; 7th and Jyeshta; 12th 
and Hasta; 13th and Purvaphalguni; 14th and Aslesha: 15th 
and Uttarashadha; 30th and Magha. 


aq and sagt have the same presiding deity ;so also alsq and 
Tier; alert and Hqa ; Was and sacweyal ; at and Ser; alts and 
aan; fafeand ai; walt and sca; Ageia and Uieh ; alt and 
aRSa 5 AeA and ATi. 

The fa (qed) and anal have the same deity; so also 447 and 
areal ; faa and aqua; {fq and ag; Faq and 4ltsl; ae and qalyear; 
faq and Saul; Mic and afefaq; vEstwa and Tike; Gexfi and 
faaat; RA afd qel; AT and aaa; Alar and sacHegal; wey 
and 94neqai ; HAN and Zalaigr; afedeey and swuatat; qt and 
tadi: za and alaal; aeaa and uit; ama and ahrat; gare 
and sq; wf and ya4g; De and 44; eft and wa; wer and 
mat; alae and zd. A Muhurtais a period of 48 minutes. 
Parasara’s names differ from those given by Varaha. During 
the Sandhyas nothing should be done; in the West and S. E., one 
should not enter the house, nor eat, nor have sexual intercourse. 


RITTTTEAIA: Xooll On the Qualities of the 
Karanas, 
TAMSIASAdaaMsanearamedarany | 

TAA ARRAS TATA AT AAT. 118, 


Sloka 1,—The.lords.of the seven moveable Kiaranas; 
viz», Bava, Balava, Kaylava, Taitija, Gara, Vanik,, and 


Adh. €. SI. 2-4.) Maas SeAIT: 749 


Vishti are in their order, Indra, Brahman, Mitra, Arya- 
man, Bhu (the Earth), Sri and Yama. 


SUT Ba yatraqad aay | 
ferquitia = aot aiearaitrarean Tara: URI 
Sloka 2.—The fixed or wa Karanas, viz, Sakuni, 
Chatushpada, Naga and Kimstughna begin from the 
latter half of the 14th day of the dark fortnight and are 
presided over by Kali, Vrisha, Phanin (serpent) and 
Maruta (wind) respectively. 
See also my notes in &. at. P. 122. 


Saad quareeaivats 
GABAA AA FT WSUS 
aenfatiaarcnia Fa Ror wT 
aTaVTe aT | Aasrey 13H 
SRaiaqeass wt ais wana: | 


1.{% ABST facaia ga stqaUzy rear lvl 
Slokag 3-4.—One should do in Bava auspicious, 
temporary, permanent and health-producing things; in 
Balava, religious or meritorious acts, and things that are 
beneficial to Brahmins; in Kaulava, things based on 
love, and choosing friends ; in Taitila, things leading to 
popularity, talking shelter, and affairs. connected with 
house ; in Gara, cultivation of lands, things pertaining 
to seeds, house and shelter;. in Vanik, long-standing 
affairs, trading and association. Nothing done in Vishti 
leads to beneficial results, but. attacking enemies; admi- 
nistering: poison.and such.other things do:-succeed. 


art, tate wet Yo aT 
POT We faggiter wea: sb 


750 _ -gueaftarama, = (Adh. C. SI. 5°8. 


ay enavareonia et altaagaiaa: 
fecqu yafitegihacr agenasixar hil 

Sloka 5.—In Sakuni, tonics, medicines, herbs (roots) 
and spells become fruitful; in Chatushpath, things relat- 
ing to cows, Brahmins, Manes, and political matters; in 
Naga, works of long-standing nature, cruel deeds, taking 
things by force and hateful things; in Kimstughna, 
meritorious deeds, sacrifices, energy-producing things 
auspicious ceremonies and those that promote the above 
things. 


BIA Tia TYR: aaa Wifseia Jauhrey | 
eA | TTASISN TAegPrTessnag Nel 
Sloka 6.—When benefics are posited in the 11th 

and the 3rd houses, when an auspicious sign is rising 
and is without the association of malefics and Jupiter is 
in the Lagna, the boring of the ear-lobes may be done, 
provided the Moon is posited in any one of the asterisms 
paaye Mrigasira, Chitra, Sravana and Revati. 


| Aeegavtadiamatyergea4as- 

qaanag Wwdlfeagazacg Tite: | 

AMET YASS TATA ATT TTA 
J Vt WG Ha AWE thsi 

‘qeqentaaremnaed ages ta 

TA AWagaegeage Aasaat wea: | 
wara & safrardasated ae @ fiat ary 

PUCNTATNTATA SATs ATG’ lel 


| Slokas 7-8,-—Marriages may be solemnized in the as. : 
terisms, Rohini, the three Uttaras, Revati, Mrigasira. 


Adh. C. SI. 7-8] wartsvata: 751. 


Mula, Anuradha, Magha, Hasta and Swati; when Mithu- 
na, Kanya or Tula is rising ; when the benefics are posi- 
ted in Bhavas other than the 7th, the 8th and the 12th; 
when the Monn is in the 2nd, 3rd, or 11th house from 
the Lagna; when the malefics are inthe 3rd, 6th, 8th 
and 11th houses, and when Venus is not in the 6th, and 
Mars, notin the 8th. Itshould also be noted that the 
Janma Rasis of the bride and the bridegroom are not 
2nd and 12th, 5th and 9th, or 6th and 8th from each 
other (7. é, they may bein opposition, 3rd and 11th, 
the same Rasi, or 4th and 10th), that the Sun and the 
Moon for the bridegroom and the bride respectively are 
favourable in their Gochara (Transit), that the Moon is 
not in conjunction with the Sun, Mars, Saturn or Venus 
(she may be in conjunction with Jupiter or Mercury or 
both), that she is not hemmed in between malefics, that 
the day chosen is without Vyatipata or Vaidhriti, or Vishti, 
or is not a Rikta-Tithi, that the day is presided over by 
a benefic planet, that the season chosen is the northern 
solstice, that the month is any one but Chaitra and 
Pousha, (even in Dakshinayana the month of Kartika 
and Margasira are to be adopted), and that the rising 
Navamsa is owned by a biped sign. 


sé 4) araTreniaaagquamaadtdeqarakag | 
sqiedianagaris sar wetia UW: qaagweq Il 
erqiquiattagay arcdl etaqara? aaafsrar e | 
weag dy Ragin ge: seateng a area: ti 

aay sagratraacata a gs {hear Ruararerana: eee: | 

quia tereratar ag Rensed Petratenei Ty: v 

| ateugarfieg gear aera: gat area | 
Rzafeer e gat Weeeiy fare: 0 


7$2 queaigarary [Adh, C. SI. 748, 


Re. Moon’s conjunctions with other planets, 

aH: AAA: YASCSUTE: Sriarzer gasilage: tt 
wa wqagal: aia war a ateTST: | 
wemeenag: seqrar: gierat 74: 0 

a aafaiga Saiaaicragqases 1 

Reg aq easa a faleleaa wat u 


Re. Benefic week-day 
WMRNAKTAAY SVE. sifaeg Beaar 
ea agai aikaa wy aareas7 

Re 8a 
wait asada set & aqanrar t 
agquiafs aniat arg: ay seua 
ATH eTAIMAl GAeWAaseAar | 
qed Yaar Ararargacdsig Maa: 
gyal gun arvat got awaraer | 
attadt zane A ATUeT satidar 
WIUTAANGA AHA: wana | 
gftear: aqaniat atg adiiata: 
MUS AMA F Asli aearasHar | 
aaa adararear 8H agqagar u 
aa agaeiar aranasis a quar 
CaAIMyMS J wat g Pans ti 


Re Navamsa being owned by a biped sign, 
fecaataat aret ata: gaiseaggiaa | 
azuateacaraign wasagaragt: tl 
faewain: aaa aggre a tz4a | 
graraadtsatat ave aaa: 0 
webanea treet arhestayle a 


Thus ends the 100th Adhyaya oh the "Qualities of the 
Karanas ”. 


ve 


Adh. CI.] CHIH MATASLAA: 753 


AAAMIAHEAA 113081 On the Effects of Birth in 
the Asterisms. 
This Adhyaya is a mere repetition of Chapter XVI of Brihat 
Jataka, 


The several effects described in this chapter for the 27 aste- 
risms may be classified as either good or bad for purposes of con- 
venience as shown in the following statement. 


Ruler of the 


Nakshatra Effect " 
: alta 1- Yogatara 


= 


napa, mae Tete ore \a—nenpystas tener Ser 


Aswini ... | Good Ketu 
Bharani .-. | Good Venus 
Krittika ... | Good »»» | Sun 
Rohini vee | Good .-» | Moon 
Mrigasiras .-. | Good wwe | Mars 
Ardra we. | Bad «- ) Rabu 
Punarvasu ..| Not very good... | Jupiter 
Pushya .-- | Good -- | Saturn 
Aslesha ..- | Bad --- | Mercury 
Magha --- | Good oe | Ketu 
Purvaphalguni ... | Good ... | Venus 
Uttaraphalguni ... | Good oo | Sun 
Hasta ...| Bad --» | Moon 
Chitra wee | Good ««- | Mars 
Swati ... | Good --- | Rabu 
Visakha «| Bad -«- | Jupiter 
Anuradha ... | Bad -- | Saturn — 
Jyeshta -.. | Bad «+ | Mercury 
Mula ..- | Good --- | Ketu 
Purvashadha .. | Good ‘see | Venus 
Uttarashadha .-- | Good «> | Sun 
Sravana eo. (Good «+> | Moon 
Dhanishta eee | Good ... | Mars 
Satabhishak .-. | Good «+ | Rahu 
Purvabhadrapada ... | Good +» | Jupiter 
Uttarabhadrapada =... | Good -» | Saturn 
Revati. --» | Good eo | Mercury . 


e 
STEEP RR TBE EIST pe IE ET TERS rt, 


‘\ The Nakshatras that are in the 8th sign (s.¢., giafm Vrischika) 
where the Moon is in depression are the 16th, the 17th and the 18th. 


754 — qeetitarary [Adh. CI, 


vise, Hasta is also bad. Among the sxyaita (Risksha Sandhi) 
Nakshatras, viz., arzeat (Aslesha), s4ut (Jyeshta) and taal (Revati), 
the last is good» because it is in Jupiter’s sign. samzt (Ardra) is 
a @< (Rudra) Nakshatra of fire. Therefore the Moon, a watery 
planet in azt (Ardra) is bad (except for fiery planets like the Sun, 
Mars, etc.). 

All Nakshatras that are bad for the Moon are in wave 
(Avaroha) position for the Moon, that is, away from the exaltation, 
Again, all stars that are bad for the Moon are in the 4th, 6th and 
Sth signs of the zodiac with the notable exception of Hz! (Ardra). 

The 8th sign (Vrischika) is throughout bad for the Moon. 
Similar results should be expected if the Moon is progressed to 
the 8th house as per any system. The middle of the 6th sign (viz., 
geqi Hasta) is bad when the Moon progresses there. The end of 
the 4th sign (saat Aslesha) is similarly bad. A fiery star like 
atai (Ardra) is bad for a watery planet like the Moon. The Moon 
progressing to the end of the 4th sign (azn Kataka), the middle 
of the 6th sign (a4 Kanya) and the 8th sign (a?aa Vrischika) in 
any horoscope is bad. 

Varahamihira has considered that the Moon is good or 
capable of giving good results in the Nakshatras ruled (according 
to f4atati Vimsottari system) by ‘benefics (including Nakshatras 
ruled by herself) and also the Nakshatras ruled by her friend the 
Sun. Next, the Nakshatras ruled by Mars are a little beneficial. 
The Nakshatras ruled by malefics, though good, are not capable 
of much improvement for finance. The above analysis is with 
respect to finance, subject to what has been stated slready with 
respect to the 6 Nakshatras, viz. faatat (Visakhal, agit 
(Anuradha), stst (Jyeshta), gear (Hasta), azaar (Aslesha) and 
ama (Ardra). 


It should further be noted that Nakshatras in the signs 
Makara and Kumbha (Saturn's), though they are ruled by benefics 
according to the rule given above, are not capable of making the 
native generous. Because, the Nakshatras are in the houses owned 
by Saturn, a conservative, stingy planet. Cf. azrat (Adata) for 
qaqa (Purvabhadrapada) and gaiq (Durgrahya) for walrs 


Adh. CI, Sl. 1-2.] arlweuraaalsvara: 755 


The Moon is good generally in the signs or Nakshatras ruled 
by benefics. 


AIT: Bets Gant cashaaig aiaata | 
HUAATATIVAR Taay ATT Vil 
Sloka 1—The person born under the star wtaret 
(Aswini) will be fond of ornaments, lovely in appearance, 
liked by all, clever and intelligent. If, at a person’s birth, 
the Moon be in the star ait (Bharani), he will carry out 
his purpose to the end, will be truthful, free from malady, 
clever and happy. 
TUB: — 
qa: get: fraqesag diagqa: are quitsieaig | 
CI: Fal GUA: WIA: MNsAHItt Aig Zar: ti 
AUT SY GUAT: | 
famaaraitm aaaaaazaaiaaa: t 
qa: taraqaaal ala: Tagzhad BT: 
At: BUSTA WAIT ALAISTS: | 
AgaapaTa wea Haniaaaa ul 
TEYINAIAAT HAR Tara: | 
Vikrat aula: aaa: ural: Ter URI 
Sloka 2.—He who is born in Haat (Krittika), will eat 
much, will be addicted to other people’s wives, will be 
brilliant in appearance and famous. The person born in 
vii@ot (Rohini) will be truthful, pure, sweet-tongued, with 
a settled mind and lovely in appearance. 
TUT 3 —— 
aael qaraishtagys saat wagat 
Vizeai Mamaaaaga Seunhssrstegs v 
Gat GB Tears: 5 7 
Wag ya: Aca AATSTA TT: | 


MBM: ays Ara: UIFRAgTa 


758 qeehRarare [Adh. CI. SI. 8-9. 


Sloka 7.—The person born under the star saz aeqet 
(Uttaraphalguni) will be loved by all, earn money by his 
own learning, will be voluptuous and happy. If a person 
be born under the star gat (Hasta), he will be industrious, 
impudent, fond of drinking, merciless and thievish. 
TANS — 

wintaa: aieaga Rarafaraiea: qa ane u 

SAS MAMANT TAWA: BE ITAT: | 
AUT W ATW: I 

camara arat aber fereaazita: 1 

wgarimtata: argent artat Faget 


€ 


sqmaatawmnym asieqtaTaeazatat: Asa: | 
VUISAAM FA Gaara sa: 0 


Farrar: qoraea aaa Parag | 
aieatt aftre Hag: Haawvaaaa: ear tel 
Sloka 8.—The person born under the jstar far 
(Chitra) will wear [beautiful garments and flowers, and 
will have beautiful eyes and limbs; while the one born in 
earat (Swati) will ,be modest, clever in trade, will be 
compassionate, sweet in speech and virtuous. 
TONS — 
aay: Mafaaaeapqaears frase: 
qua: aanaireaaa great qarguag 
AU A TAA: | 
AMUALAFAS: TAMA aA aCeTSAT F | 
aratarat qaura adiergaar 
agiaual aes Pradtaiay tral aga: | 
AAAISSING: Atal Ata: SSRI t 


deen grrarasatg: REET | 
mat egaral garwreaisareag ust 


Adh. CI. 10-11.] QSriyeaaaarscara: 759 


Sloka 9.—The. person born under the star fearer 
(Visakha) will be envious, covetous, of bright appearance, 
clever in talking and quarrelsome. The man born in 
agirar (Anuradha) will be opulent, will be dwelling in 
foreign countries, will be unable to endure hunger and 
will ramble from place to place. 

TOUTE: — 

daagad wa; seepegedt frararg 4 u 

wait saga fear aasza: ara ti 
BI GT TR: | 

MaTASANATa: AIASTTANTR BAVA: | 

cigetsRraray eaegia caraansar i 

RaWATAAS Yararaaeaagierarst | 

qiiasasashqt ata: aeartadt u 

~~ rn e 4 g ba 
SUB TIGHTS ATS FASAATAHITs | 
YS Aral Wary Tat a fea Hate Brat Uo 

Sloka 10.—If a person be born in the star vawt 
(Jyeshta), he will not have many friends; he will be 
contented, will be virtuous and will be exceedingly irri- 


table. The one born in @at (Moola) will be proud, 
wealthy, happy, of a soft disposition, firm-minded, but 


luxurious in his living. 
YUST— ase ‘ee TT ABT | 


qesevta agez aaa qasdaaeataiag sv 
SUT @ GUAT 

Thay yA UIg Tat wearin areas AAT | 

sitsiqatsdait ata: MMNseRTTeT Ul 

AATET STA Tal TATE ATE SSEUTS: | 

Ke: Gaga qs great 4 


EQACTHSA ATA TEATTA WIAs | 
aa RataaiiargtarHpagaays 112 oi 


760 ‘geeatgararg = [Adh, CI. SI. 12-13. 


Sloka 11.—The person born in the star ‘Yararer 
(Purvashadha) will have an amiable wife, will be proud 
and firm in friendship; while the person born in s@zreret 
(Uttarashadha) will be well-behaved, righteous, will 
have many friends, will be grateful and amiable. 
TUBS — 

Praace: Haare grat ous eqrez: | 

fata antar aa sagt agareaa: uy 
TaN A GWWA— 

aiearwsqaie: FAAS y: TW Te: | 

fraaaeqaiia: ana: qaqerg 

WUMATATaA: TaATATavayaat a | 

aghrer: Haare ata: agaza a i 

MassIt ATTMATNT aarlean Tara: | 
ata Bets Bl Wiahal afagia qwagsq: 1221 

Sloka 12,—The person who is born in the star #am 
(Sravana) will be learned, possess a generously-disposed 
wife, will be wealthy and fainous, The person born in 
aver (Dhanishta) will be liberal in his gifts, wealthy, 
courageous, fond of music and greedy. 

TINS: — 

SACI VAAN MAT: earigey Icy aay TAA: | 

aaa aarareteaimt was wind: tt 
AUT FWTAT:— 

wife waarearagiasary aero car: t 

fMatiaaia: aah CAAA 

MAMTAAITAAA: BTTTAA Ga ATAT | 

arrange fealty: afaearateara: u 


eHeavsqaal get artes: aarag sata: | 
axiaiaisa: @littaqargearat F 2311 


Adh. CI. Sl. 14.]  garfteqaastsvara: 16) 


Sloka 13.—If a person be born in the star wataqR 
(Satabhishak), he will be truthful, unfortunate, will con- 
quer his enemies, will be daring and hard to be won 
over. The person whose birth is in yatarg¢zt (Purvabha- 
drapada) will be afflicted, will be henpecked, wealthy 
and clever, but a miser. 

TNS: — 

HEAT Hat Tate Rgaras: | 

sqaaefiaeyzs: carqa dia base Ul 

giaitaa: efterat at carqsaae agwiges 
AV A TW: — 

GUTATAA SUA AVr aa iz: 


~ NAN 


_ Racaiaa: Rargeiereiar weed Tit 0 


qengar wat Maravedienaeaarae: | 
faqa: Taq eran srentede vale ara: ui 


TH Bal snag Harraifsar Ratatg | 
AWG BAM WE Bredary Fey Vv" 
Slokas 14.—The person born under the star swatarg- 


vat (Uttarabhadrapada) will be clever in speaking, happy, 
possess children, will overcome his enemies and be virtu- 
ous ; while the’person born in tadt (Revati) will have a 
symmetrical body (all his limbs perfect), will be liked by 
all, will be courageous, clean and wealthy. | 
a . 
REE TATA ANAMTATEaAT BHT: aaATST: 

qos waarg ae: dich @ gum: ger 

vse waeaaegaardiegataa: 
al @ qe: — 

TIARA Aa: TANS AS Tagawa: | 

Sanquawia: wrensegea ad aa: ov 

waldye sara saafatal Agaguata: | 
— Atrerrerga: dha gerd ara: 
- Thus ends the 101st Adhyaya on the “Effects of Birth in the 
Asterisms’’, 7 


{. % 96. 


roa * gyetferers, = (Adh. CIT. Sh. ted 
alaizart RoR Division of the Zodiac 
into Signs. | 
ahgeqisy aay agate Bead ATI. 
TIA ARSTAT TRogisd | aaa: 1 20- 

Sloka. 1.—The sign (@@-Mesha) Aries comprises the 
whole asterisms of Aswini and Bharani and the first: quar- 
ter of Krittika ; (g@v4-Vrishabha) Taurus, the three remain- 
ing quarters of Krittika, the whole of Rohini and the first 
half of Mrigasira. 

aaaaisg TR Jaraicaaas gar | 
eC ba 
qe FATA: WIT A BHT: ZW 

Sloka 2.—Sign (fa#ga-Mithna) Gemini comprises the 
latter half of Mrigasiras, the whole of Ardra and the first 
three quarters of Punarvasu; (#%2%-Karkataka) Cancer, 


the last quarter of Punarvasu and the whole of Pushya 
and Aslesha. 
fagisy AT Tal A Heal Te TaN | 
aaa caRenTs | BaTwaA: 1:31 
Sloka 3.—The sign (f@¢-Simha) Leo comprises the 
whole of Magha and Purvaphalguni and the first quarter 
of Uttaraphalguni; (#*at-Kanya), Virgo, the remaining 
quarters of Uttaraphalguni, the whole of Hasta and the 
first half of Chitra. | 
asia Fareard ate: ncgad ara: | 
aia araeagrateran sagt vi 
Sloka 4.—Sign (g@t-Tula) Libra consists of the 
latter half of Chitra, the whole of Swati and the initial 
three quarters of Visakha; sign ,¥f@s-Vrischika) Scorpio, 
of the last quarter of Visakha and the whole of Anuradha 
and Jyeshta. 


Adh. CII. Sl. 5-7.] - atfwecaadtsvara: | 768 


YORU! Tal TaTgegattaa seat | 
MRTAARAT TTT: TF aTARTTT IMI 


Sloka 5.—Sign (aga-Dhanus) Sagittarius comprises 
the whole of Mula and Purva-ashadha and the first quarter 
of Uttara-ashadha ; sign (##t- Makara) Capricorn, of the 
remaining three quarters of Uttara-ashadha, the whole of 
Sravana and the first half of Dhanishta, 


SAseMaages BANAT @ Talat: | 
ARITA YF TAraTr taal FT aqs Ni 


_ Sloka 6.—Sign (@#a-Kumbha) Aquarius comprises 
the latter half of Dhanishta, the whole of Satabhishak and 
the first three garters of Purvabhadra ; sign (@t4-Meena) 
Pisces, the last qurter of Purvabhadra,: and the whole of 
Uttarabhadra and Revati. 


ataitsaqera yascaea: | 
Raaaiftaded vrezert aataTq list 


Sloka 7.—The signs Mesha, Simha and Dhanus 
commence with the beginning of Aswini, Magha and Mula 
respectively ; and the odd asterisms ‘(beginning with the 
third) retire from each sign with one or more quarters in 
an increasing order. 

The 3rd Star is Krittika; it closes Mesha with its first quarter. 


Mrigasiras is the 5th; it closes Vrishabha with its second quarter ; 
and so on, 


Thus ends the 102nd Adhyaya on “ The Division of the Zo- 
diac into Signs’. 


7 ae - geedfearary [Adh. CIII. ‘Si. 1-8. 


faaeqeaq WeoRll (of Vindhyavasin). 
Effects of Planetary Combination 
* atthe Time of Marriage. 
qa aula Ragicsal ga 
— ugtaaarat wast aitary | 
TH: VUFAATIA THA Asal: 
wig seeds arate: it 
Sloka 1.—lIf the Sun or Mars occupy the Lagna at 
the time of marriage, the girl will become a widow; 
‘Rahu in such a position will deprive her of her children ; 
‘Saturn will make her penurious; Venus, Mercury or 


Jupiter will give her a good character; the Moon will cut 
short her span of life. 


Hila ABCA AAT 
aiRagiaaas fad fata | 
Atatataat eaRalear 
A WYATT HVA AYTEs URW 


Sloka 2.—The Sun, Saturn, Rahu or Mars posited in 
the 2nd house from the Lagna causes unfailingly inde- 
scribable miseries arising from poverty ; Jupiter, Venus or 
Mercury in such a position makes the girl very rich and 
have a long-lived husband; the Moon enables her to 
become the mother of many children. 


AAC MATSIAT ITA 

qa acl aga Tarayet a | 
saat Rarerga: gaat wala 

aed cafe fang ag Aikeear zi 


Adh. CIIL. Sl. 4-6.) :aftreeraastseara: 16K 


Sloka 3.---The Sun, the Moon, Mars, Jupiter, Venus 
or Mercury, when posited in the 3rd house from : the 
Lagna, makes her always wealthy and. have many’ 
children ; Saturn makes her famous and the beloved of 
her husband; Rahu in such a position invariably causes 
death. 

aed Ta? Bala Gaga Aaa 
¢ 
auivagerfaen: ger Tat a | 
TE: array fafasisedyd 
: N 
TaTAT: QIVA FAA Alreay livil 

Sloka 4.—When Saturn occupies the 4th house, 
very little milk will flow from her breasts; the Sun or 
the Moon in such a position makes her unfortunate (ae, 
disliked by the husband); Rahu creates enemies (or a co- 
wife) ; Mars causes poverty; Venus Jupiter or Mercury 
bestows happiness. 

asraat wags we Ware 
TRAM Tat TAtal F 
uigeana wet aremii 
BAe IAAF eT TIES Ul 

Sloka 5.—The Sun or Mars in the 5th house frbtr 
the Lagna will certainly destroy her issue; Mercury; 
Jupiter or Venus bestows many sons; Rahu catises 


death; Saturn, a fell disease ; the Moon brings about the 
girl’s death ere long. 


qersrar: atricaraneigsatans | 
er gua gaat wate wary | 
eR: Hilla aagAa azI- 
wat wager: aeahrat FSi. 


765. geeaigaraia [Adh. CIIL SI. 7-9, 


‘Bloka 6.—Saturn, the Sun, Rahu, Jupiter or Mars in 
the 6th house makes the bride the beloved of her hus- 
band, and devoted to the elders (such as the father-in-law); 
the Moon makes her a widow; Venus, penurious ; Mer- 
cury, wealthy but fond of quarrels. 

TUTMAT ATCA Ta: 
gat 14g as aqua: | 
FaeqqeaarTag Tatars. 
SAUAATTAATTT A AAUTHAT (hi! 


Stoka 7.—Saturn, Mars, Jupiter, Mercury, Rahu, 
the Sun, the Moon and Venus posited in the 7th house, 
cause perforce widowhood, imprisonment, destruction, 
decay, loss of wealth, disease, absence in other places and 
death respectively. 


araseay qegal fad ait 
my sat wqqaa as ug: | 
ai: BUMIsat asat asia: 
alent vara Waagat a cil 


Sloka 8.—Jupiter and Mercury (severally or together) 
in the 8th house cause separation between the husband 
and the wife for certain; the Moon, Venus and Rahu 
cause death ; the Sun makes her predecease her husband; 
Mars, sickly ; Saturn, wealthy “and the beloved of her 
husband. 


ad faa aagaraeagat 
aay sitet aiaarecqtiny | 
UE ataaay Hila aecat 
RAT dded Se DAE? JIS 


Adh. CII. Sl. 10-12.] safreqaastssara: 767 


«+ Sloka 9.—Venus, the Sun, Mars and Jupiter posited: 
in: the 9th house make the girl devoted to virtue; Mer- 
cury gives her good health ; Rahu and Saturn make her 
barren ; the Moon gives her daughters and much roaming: 
about. 


Uganda Raat Refs 
aly tat aay WaaTy | 
wey easaat suet a ax: 
Fel Gard gaat a By ol 
Sloka 10.—Rahu in the 10th house causes widow- 
hood ; the Sun and Saturn make her addicted to sinful 
deeds ; Mars causes death ; the Moon makes her indigent 
and unchaste (frail); the others (Mercury, Jupiter and 
Veuus), wealthy and beloved of the husband. 


ara tagat avai zag: 
gaieaat fafaga wast aarery | 
agsadi Gaye: aaa: azat 
Q 
TE? HUAI WTTATAIT 112 VU 
Sloka 11.—The Sun posited in the 11th house bes- 
tows many sons; the Moon, wealth; Mars, sons ; Saturn, 
wealth ; Jupiter, longevity; Mercury, prosperity ; Rahu, 
long life on the husband ; and Venus, riches. 


aa qedaadi Rasehct 
TR TsTIHL goet FT Wg: | 
are ag: afuadl aggaaisi 
Taraageat tas: gaz esi 
Sloka 12.—Jupiter in the 12th house confers wealth 


on the bride; the Sun makes her poverty-stricken; the 
Moon, a spend-thrifs; Rahu, immoral; Venus, devoted 


468 queditvarara (Adh. CIII. 13; CIV. 2. 


to her. husband ; Mercury ‘bestows many children and 
grand children ; Saturn and Mars make her heart addict- 
ed:to drink. 


Teena qyzcisa ag yeaa 

Mae gaint Aqeaagaiwaa avant | 
afer are aad a a al Aq od a att 

waa: Fat gard Tawa sateqgRud sresseq 12311 

Sloka 13.—The dust that is raised in the evening 

by the pointed hoofs of the cows beaten by the cow-herds 
with their sticks is favourable for the marriage of beauti- 
ful girls. It bestows abundant wealth, sons, sound health 
and leads to the husband’s affection. At this time it is 
not at all necessary to consider the asterism, the Tithi, 
Karana, Yoga and Lagna- For, the dust raised by cows 
is noted for giving happiness to men and wards off all 
sins. 

Thus ends the 103rd Adhyaya on the “Effects of Planetary 
Combination at the Time of Marriage’’. 


TEM AMSAT: 11208!) On Transits of Planets. 
Tay aay faHana wHraceant Faeaars | 
Teas Brerher a Arias aaTeryalad qane ue 


Sloka 1,—Generally, ancient gems and Sastras 
which are without strings (unstrung) and a metrical form 
(respectively), whose bores are quite visible and faults 
apparent (respectively), become fit to be worn as orna- 
ments and to be held in high esteem (respectively), when 
they are combined with new strings and excellent ideas 
couched in fine metres (respectively). 


may rad saqeraisamensity aeariy | 
ANTI FAI GACT as UR, 


Ada. CIV. S] 3.) Safeesraaaiseara: 769 


Sloka .2.--Generally, the transit of planets comes 
within the purview of our daily experience. Hence I shall 
expound its effects, O noble persons in varied metres, 
Kindly excuse my volubilily. : 


This verse is composed in the 2114! metre known as 3a@aat. 
Here the author steps into the realm of Prosody too. Primarily, 
metres are classified under two heads., v7z., Ja and atfa. The for- 
mer is based upon g@oups of three syllables called Hazau1, while the 
latter, upon groups of four Matras or syllabic instants. a1at belongs 
to the latter class. Most of the verses in this work are in the art 
* metre, whose construction is as follows:— The first and third quar- 
ters must have 12 Matras each of three Ganas, the second, 18 and 
_ the fourth 15. In the second, there will be four Ganas and a final 
long syllable. In the 4th, the 9th Matra will be considered as a group 
bylitself. Thus in both the halves, there will be 7 groups and a 
long syllable (2 Matras), Itisarule that the odd groups ought 
not to have 3am (v—v~) and the sixth ought to have 377 or four 
Laghus (v» - »). Let us take the above verse itself and see if it 
satisfies these conditions. 


6 
ex) ee a ~) oe =e wow) mar aomue * (12 +18) 
_.(12+15). 


— ae} w=ewd “a ww vy = —) vy m— —) 


In addition to this, the above is qaaqal Sal; 2.2, the 2nd 
and 4th Ganas of the first half should necessarily be 3771 having a 
long syllable on either side; the second half follows the rules of an 


ordinary aqi. In the above example the 4th 41 is not 4, 
~ 8 Ca sa ae. A 
HSeqae weal A Aalal Tgassal AAT | 
areal Gal a Gai ar aur aaga agar 11311 


Sloka 8-—Or, my statements on this subject will 
surely be admired by the learned who have heard those 
of Mandavya, for men do not love their devout and 
chaste wives so much as they do courtesans. 

This verse is composed in the waq49% kind of fat whose 
characteristics are that the first half is like that of the ordinary 
Arya and the second \jke that of @aq=), Mandavya’s statements, 


770 geedftararmg, = [Adh, CIV. SI, 464, 


though containing the truth, are not couched in fine words and 
metres. So, the author says that his will be loved and appreciated 
by the cultured. This Mandavya is mentioned by Pingalacharya 
as an author on Prosody. 


aa TafaeT Aa TTA ATTRA 
aia: aqaaeqaanal THAT TTT 
“w e “P a 
MET FSAI MIATT TAS TUMET War: 
nw Q 
TR AHANTTAAST: WHIT AHA WU 

Sloka 4.—The Sun in his transit is beneficial in the 
6th, 3rd and 10th places from the Janma Rasi; the Moon 
in the Janma Rasi, the 3rd, 6th, 7th and the 10th houses; 
Jupiter, in the 2nd, 5th, 7th and 9th; Mars and Saturn, 
in the 3rd and 6th; Mercury, in the 2nd, 4th, 6th, 8th 
and 10th ; all the planets are beneficial when they tran- 
sit the 11th place. Venus causes dread like the tiger in 
the 6th, 7th and 10th; (in other places, he confers bene- 
ficial results). 

A knowledge of 44 is quite necessary for ascertaining, the 
correct results of transit. See @I-T Adhyaya XIII-60 and G77, 
Adhyaya XXVI. 

This verse is composed in the agaaAeasa whose definition 
is yaladamedal: TAT: Digelamieay- 

AUEATATISH AIA AAT wiBetATTeTgTaT 

aaae facia Raft Ta ge aaat tat a | 

maa aaia aaiaaaga RIFT | 


Tay FT Aqa Taras A gE? Sra Waka ust 
Sloka 5.—The Sun passing through the Janma Rasi 
causes fatigue, reduces wealth, brings on bowel-disease 
and wearisome travelling. When he transits the 2nd 
house, there will be loss of wealth and the person will. be 
unhappy. He will be duped and suffer from eye-trouble, 


Adh. CIV. Sl. 6-7.]  safvenaaaiscara: 77) 


In the 3rd house, acquisition of a new position, advent of 
moneys, happiness, freedom from sickness and destruc- 
tion of enemies will be the result. In the 4th house, the 
Sun causes diseases, and there will often arise impedi- 
ments tothe native in the matter of his sexual enjoy- 
ments. 

This Sloka is in aati metre which is defined as a¥aalai a7 
Rafraiage ara arTdag 

qien wy Taney aftaic agar tesa: 
qgsal ata tia q7ala a Rey alia gzia | 

Heats AIA ASAT aT sed a HA 

be “~ 

VERMA Were wala gaat a alt afta Fi 


Sloka 6.-When the Sun transits the 5th house, there 
will be multifarious troubles arising from illness and ene- 
mies ; in the 6th, he puts an end to illness, enemies and 
grief ;in the 7th, there will be wearisome travelling, 
diseases of the stomach and humiliation; in the 8th, he 
will suffer from fear and diseases ; and even his own wife 
will speak harshly to him. 


This verse is called @aza!. Thisconsists of 20 letters; the 
definition is 
Tae aeaaea craagat wat 1: GaTAr | 


THATIEG Bea aay Aaa 
ae Magy TAIT BATS WAT | 
ween art ara Vaca Thera 
graiat Ast Aaa AHS TAI AACITT Wl 
Sloka-7.—The Sut in the 9th causes danger, humili- 


ation, disease and impediments to wealth and undertak- 
ings; inthe 10th house, a very mighty undertaking will 


a i | geeaigarara. [Adh. CIV. SI. 8-9, 


be successfully completed. A new position, honour, wealth 
and freedom from disease will be the effect of the Sun’s 
transit in the 11th house. When the Sun passes through 
the 12th, the activities of only those that havea bright 
character will be successful and not of others. @ 
This is in gad metre- A Iz consists of 19 syllables 
FAT AUNT ANSSCARMAIA: VNB: FTA- 
Ul AAAI TSITART 
~ ¢ lat 
fata ataraiq saqala aeay wale | 
ada Tagluafaaazaieaia Sag 
aqusaaia: Rraftitt yaya TET lel! 


Sloka 8.-The Moon in her travel through the Janma 
Rasi gives excellent dishes, couches and shawls; in the 
2nd, reduces honour and wealth and causes impediments; 
in the 3rd, confers clothes, damsels, wealth, success and 
happiness ; when she is in the 4th, one loses trust in others, 
as in a mountaih infested with snakes 

The metre is [2a@ltoh- (17 syllables). 
7@ azReu aaaauaia: raft. 
Seq sata Gaalt gaat wad aad 
ag Ad aaaft ga aaa & | 
ald Aa VaaATa aTa Aa | 
a 
aeqrered Bi Rat wea att Be SH 

Sloka 9.—The Moon in the 5th brings about humi- 
liation, illness, grief and obstruction to journey; in the 
6th, confers wealth and happiness and destroys enemies 
and diseases; in the 7th confers vehicles, honour, couches, 


food and money. Whoever is not frightened as by a snake 
trodden upon accidentally, when the Moon isin the 8th ? 


e 


Adh. CIV. Sl. 10-12.) saftreeaaatscara: 773 


. « This is in aeztmmeat (of 17 syllables). 
WHAM AMATI 1: AQT Sis:— 


ATATEM WANS TATNGTIMAHT 
“ CoA cat 
TAANTA ATBATMATTRU TA | 
STaTTgEAMaTAeATETT 
TMA aftaranaecs BI FT ATI 12H! 
Sloka 10.—The Moon in the 9th causes imprison- 
ment, agony, suffering and stomach diseases ; in the 10th, 
confers position of authority and accomplishment of one’s 
task ; in the 11th, prosperity, meeting of friends, riches 
and joy; in the 12th, causes expenses and blemishes 
caused by one’s own action, asin the case of a bull 
(which spoils both its hoofs and horns, by striking the 
earth, etc-) 
The a@ is aT aItd—It is also known as @itoft 
graaitd eat at eer a warzwads:— 
Sastiara: waa fade agian waerttalt: | 
9 A oN A A 
qa 9 fraaadiliedegasaataaisit a: ara 221 


Sloka 11.—Mars in the Janma Rasi causes bodily 
affliction ; in the 2nd, trouble from the sovereign and 
enemies, quarrels, excessive bilious troubles, fire accidents, 
robbery and disease, though the person is like Upendra or 
thunderbolt. 

This is in sRaq1— 
steqam gy aat am 7: — 


adtanaeaaeal Ata: aargencacanta | 


aaifyaat vanities acaraereana Parent 220 


Sloka 12,—Mars if the 3rd confers benefits through 
thieves and urchins, energy, authority, wealth, woollen 
articles, mineral wealth and the like. 


di 


7724 qeediarara. = [Adh. CIV. St. 13-16. 


This is written in Sqa1f%, a combination of FXTH and SfxraqgTI. 


wala witty aad saastazTaT ea: | 
HIST ATS THATTAALT Beis Aga it 


Sloka 13.—Mars in the 4th causes, fever, stomach- 


maladies, bleeding and great harm through the association 
with the wicked. 


This is in TANZI—TANAT Tal TH Tes— 
Ryncatarais wat araHay Bal Belg | 
early area Pe wag fae fea Hrta seat qa Nee 
Sloka 14.—Mars in the 5th causes enmity, illness, 
anger, fear, grief on account of one’s sons, and a quick 


loss of energy as the tossing of a jasmine wreath from 
the head of a monkey. 


The metre is aIedi-asacacht ameat aaI— 
figaansefiataa: anaaiiguarean: | 
figura adiad feaqazaraiediad eu 


Sloka 15.-Mars in the 6th brings about the ternsina- 
tion of strife with one’s enemies, fear and quarrels, and 


confers gald, corals and copper thus enabling a person. to 
hold. his head aloft.. 


The metre ts 34U344- 
ayia aaret Te aA aqawasaiAgy ast ait- 
HOABVENAHASTTUAH ATA 
agitate: arasaaraisey | 
gu qaqditea oftaardaraiaty- 
Matrantdrmrazeagea: esi 


~ Sloka 16.—Mars in the 7th causes. quarrel. with one! 
wife, eye-trouble and stomach-disease, in the &th house, 


Adh. CIV. $1 17-19.)  saftrenaastsvarta: ak 


the native will be emaciated through bleeding, and there 
will be loss of wealth and honour; in the 9th house, he 
will suffer insults, loss of wealth and impeded gait owing 
to the loss of bodily fluids and consequent weakness. 

The metre is fasitaqafa- 

ekaanstar Tarai BUaT | 


qUATETT AF wale Airsaaierad 77y | 
BAI aIMMay YS TAH WaT; ag Paiay_ NM 
Sloka 17,—Mars in the 10th produces neutral effects; 
in the Lith, he causes gain of various kinds of riches and 
success, and enables one to excerise power and anthority 
over the country, just as a bee has its free movements and 
enjoyment in a forest of abundant flowers. 
The metre is agteqaz.- 
vata aaa at aaa dal awaizadeaa gieqarm- 
AC 
AAMSTIITIT afigd Aeacqsayaay aaa | 
A ~A SN he 2) e ~ ~ 
ainatiay aaraetaistiecdaiiaaa afar vec 
Sloka 18.—Mars in the 12th house tortures a man 
with expenditure of various kinds, hundreds of disasters, 
wrath of women, bilious affections and -eye-pain, though 
the person may be proud of his being a scion of Indra (or 
birth in the family of Indra). 
The metre is %*%42II- 
an g anagiha ait ageqdar saat ga 
Cat ~~ age 
qewsahigaieqaeiean: aHwed TAG! | 
way Bra WY TTT ATashy SIS >] TMA 2A 
Sloka 19,—When Mercury transits through the 
Janma-Rasi, a man will*have his wealth depleted through 
wicked persons, tale-bearers, enemies, duplicity, imprison- 
ment and quarrels, and he will not hear even a kind word 


a6 qeaditamna [Adh. CIV. Si. 20-23, 


in his wanderings. 
The metre is Sira-eaqaar Traiger 7 | 
Gaal aana sasisa: Aen aga Teale: |. 
ON e ~ ~y 
ananaraagaad gars asia afta: Ge Roll 
Sloka 20.—When Mercury passes through the 2nd 
house. a person will meet with ill-treatment or insult, but 
will acquire wealth ; when he travels through the 3rd, he 
will make friends, have fear at heart for the king and 
enemies and roam about bris'"ly on account of his wicked 
deeds. 
The metre is {a7<-Ragz aqaaa: ala a 
TA ATAGSAAISA TaALTay aaa aq Aiawieay | 
gawd aaanertae aaa a a ofataly aq uel 


Sloka 21.—During Mercury’s transit through the 4th 
house, the person’s relatives and family will prosper, and 
he will gain wealth ; when he travels through the 5th house, 
the person concerned will quarrel with his sons and wife, 
and will not enjoy even his charming wife. 


° Em, «A a OO m™ ~ 
The metre is @au—aai as Ty sa aga: 4 


aaa Araadtias a 1 avd Raadia waa a | 
AYR TageaMaasra Aged wales qlaaedoitay ua 
Sloka 22.--During Mercury’s transit through the 6th 
house, the person gets popularity, success and rise ; when 
he passes through the 7th, he loses his lustre, and have 
quarrels often ; when through the &th, he will have gains, 
success, children, clothes, money and skill that brings 


solace to his heart. 
This is in nado metre sara eae: re fdoherz. 


fanart aan: afiga: sand gat waz | 
amg Wat a at axaaisa Hat WUT a NRW. 


Adh. CIV. SI. 24-25.]  agqefrencasitseara: 444 


en eerie 


Sloka 23.—When Mercury passes through the 9th 
house, he creates obstacles ; through the 10th, kills ene- 
mies, bestows wealth, a beautiful damsel on a couch, her 
house property, fine words and sheets. 


The metre is a144.— 
atastasala afsaaxr 


qagtaaalUeaqaayaty- 

wafeafeenga ara wearea: | 
ftyaitaadin: oifedr siaaer 

a cela cag afettraiaatergq uv 


Sloka 24.—When Mercury passes through the 11th 
house, the person will get wealth, sons, happiness, wife, 
friends, vehicles and contentment; he will. also speak 
sweet words ; when through the 12th, he will be troubled 
by enemies, insults and diseases; he will not be able to 
enjoy the pleasure of union with his beloved. 


The metre is aiivai— 

aqaIagaa aliwat WUASIB: 0 | 
ait qearaqaaaadl: Mae! TERTETT: | 

bas » @ (al os ~ a 

MAMISMY SAU GVA Blea assy watlrslaay ze 

Sloka 25.—When Jupiter passes through the Janma 
Rasi, the person will lose his money, mental balance and 
position; he will quarrel frequently ; when he travels 
through the 2nd, he will get wealth and be free from 
enemies ; his belovd will sport with his*mouth as does a 
bee with the lotus. , 

The metre is warlaataa.— 

a at oil ait wraretawterar. 

1. 3 98 ; 


778 | uautermn [Adl. CFV. SI. 9628. 


MAMI BHAA Bvia- 
ah Btieygeaas aes 
wa afta cifsatag a Aetq 
aa are arft aa WAAAE NEI 
Sloka 26 .—When Jupiter passes through the 3rd 
house, the person will be troubled by loss of position, and 
his undertaking will be spoiled; when through the 4th, 
he will be troubled by multitudinoms wogries caused by his 
relatives, and he will get peace of mind neither in the 
village, nor in the forest that abounds in intoxicated 
peacocks. 
This is in FayAT.— 
ee weit sat cam wanqTa— 
aaqata WF Taqwa: 
GRAD AgI Saas | 
ARARGTICTARITAD-_— 
saltrqnirerpary aTaTSs 200 
Sloka 27.—Jupiter passing through the 5th house 
bestows servants, meritorious acts, sons, elepharsts, horses, 


bulls, gold, houses in town, young women, garments, gems 
and a number of virtues, 


The metre is HiAQuRTAT.— 
aquiraaRris aiiqtiae:- 
a adic fener aa ad Aiaaihesanaz | 
ekregawatrad gaa sag: gag git heen 
Sloka 28.—When Jupiter passes through the ‘6th 


house, even a friend’s face bright with the Tilaka will not 
please a person’s heart ; nor the fowest thet és rosownding 


Adh. CIV, Sl 29-38.) agefiwassawaiscara: 779 


with the notes of pea-eocks and cucinoos and looking won- 
derful by the frisking of the fawns. 
lhe idea is, friends will becqme enemies and good things will 
look hateful. This sloka is in eftacgaga- 
Raantaddad eit vader angioregsg 
Aeaye: zed cea wraTd Fqaregraay | 
waa agauagad slearat a fe Reet sues 
_ Sloka 29. —Jupiter in the 7th confers couches, erotic 
‘pleasure, wealth, food, flowers, vehicles, graceful speech 
and intelligence. | 
The metre is 3(@aqz.— 
Bears + AAdaate- 
ay Say Bea arngT asa aegqaeata Tara | 
AgrggaHAUate Ba sia: Milsiat aT oTAT UIRet 


Sloka 30.—Jupiter in the 8th house causes imprison- 
meettt, disease, intense grief, hardships on a journey, and 
diseases almost amounting to death. When travelling in 
the 9th house, Jupiter confers skill, authority, sons, success 
in the task undertaken, wealth and fertile lands. 


The metre is afet.— 
are at Veaiedayze4ras: — 


WMaReaqagl TPT Aaa saa 7s | 
aiegsealy feoterererary arte watt ad Titers HAAN 
Sloka 31.—Jupiter in the LOth house destroys one’s 
posttionhealth and wealth ; im the 11th, he Bestows the 
abowe things ; im the 12th, he gives grief causing the per- 
som to swenwe from the right path, though he may be 
preceeding in a chariot 6n;his journey. 
, The meine is WHEL — 
mgitest vitzay— 


780. geedtarata = [Adh. CIV. Sl. 32-34. 


TART YIFA AUTH: 
AUMAATTAIFTATEARVT AIT | 
TATA TATA Wag_ged 
qacdaadigaaiaizamany 23 
Sloka 32.-When Venus in his transit travels through 
the Janma Rasi, he confers on the person concerned a 
good deal of the requisites of love, fragrant and attractive 
perfumes, flowers and garments, couches, houses, seats 
and food. Consequently, the person will act the part of a 
bee on the lotus of the face of an intoxicated beloved. 
The metre is (a@ifaeait.— 
vata ufadt af att awqe— 


ga Relaged saatarayquaaqageraeaneazarce | 
aaad FIRMA Ba Taatenaaqaaislt 


Sloka 33.—- Venus in the 2nd house bestows issue, 
wealth, corn, royal favour, family interests, flowers and 
gem-ornaments. Consequently, the person though grown 
old with grey hairs (like the flowers of Tilaka in the 
spring season), enjoys sexual pleasures. 


The metre is aa-alasant— 
Ser aaeafawar as wit 7-— 


AMANITA ATAITI Ay TAqeTRs | 
aa Adda GeLaAIT VaeaWaaat ay ahET NN 
Sloka 34.—When Venus passes through the 3rd, 
house, the person gets authority, wealth, honour, position, 
prosperity, garments and destruction of enemies; when- 
Venus travels through the 4th, he fneets with friends, and : 


gets power similar to that of Rudra, Indra and thunder- 
bolt, - a A ; oy on or 


Adh. CIV: SI, 35-38.] agziteaaaatsvara: 784 


The metre is &Z451— 
entenaer ay at watt a: | 
waaly Ys Tanda qeaktayd aquaria | 
gasaaisa feaagaaaataed aiadg 124i 
Sloka 85.—When Venus passes through the ‘sth 
house, the person’s elders are pleased ; relatives come to 
him ; he also gets issue, wealth, friends’ helping hands ; 
and his enemies are destroyed. 
The metre is aaalaan- 
— waa@ar ear sar Tee — 
ql UT? wtaatinaa: aeqa Wray agaisgay | 
Massa arqiitesqral ventadigaaata fat q a4 - 
Sloka 36.—When Venus passes through the 6th’ 
house, the person suffers humiliation, diseas¢ and mental’: 
torment ; when through the 7th, some disaster pertaining 
to or caused by women ; when through the 8th, he - gets 
houses, attendants and a prosperous wife. 


The metre is @gai- 
sete advannezga— 
aaa J WHAATAAAT WIASATAMATIy aq | 
caasraiaEwely fraaig araaTalt seq SAT UI 
Sloka 37.—When Venus passes through the 9th 
house, the person performs religious acts, gets women,. 
happiness and wealth, and garments; when through the. 
10th, he suffers insults aud quarrels invariably, though he: 
speaks very few words. ise NS 
The metre is sfratarz- 
afar away d— : 
TUM Br Far BETarateqar | 
TART SHAT TATE ATRIA TSI 


18%.  geeafternng [Adth. CIV. Sl. 39-40). 


Sloka 38.—When Venus passes through the: 1th 
house, the person gets friends, wealth, food amd perfumes; 
when through the 22th, he acquires wealth and garments, 
but centanly loses some of the latter. 


The metre is feux- 
 @alt feag: saitfta:— 


awa ca Ausra asifiga: saaegae: | 
TUATTTITRAT Agarigdisaadiages 124i 

Sloka 39.—When Saturn in his transit passes through 
the Janma Rasi, the person will be troubled by poison 
or fire, will be separated from his kith and kin, will hit 
his relations, will wander in foreign lands, will have naei- 
ther friends, nor a house to live in, will be hateful in 
appearance, will be poor, without children, a wanderer 

The metre ts aza- 

aq acsufiaasngaq— 

anagizataged Raaaay 
eqgqarwatsaagiaqaages: | 
Rage: FS QW ach ag aa- 
hers GINGA FTE TT PRT UveH 
_-. Sloka 40.—When Saturn passes through the 2nd 

house in his transit, the person will be bereft of gaad 
appearance, happiness, pride and emergy; even if he, 
shauki.earn mach wealth through other channels, it wowld 
not stay with him as water in a bambao leaf. 

The metre is 4777giaa- 


Regttaarsatd aeraaein— 


Aide. CPV. St 41-44.) agieewanatscara: | 163 


aa eqhn eames aeea TTT 


an TPA Aesisd: uve : 
Biaka 41.—When Satarn passes through the iad 
house, ome gets money, slaves attendants, camels, buffa- 
iges, horses, elephants, donkeys, houses, wealth, sound 
health and freedom from illness; and even if he is a 
coward, he will curb his mighty enemies. through his heroic 
efforts. 
The metre is afear- 
WAA Wil 4 JSAtta art a wiser— 


qd Ue adgasegia gefxanraigaage: | 
WIIG aay Wary TE yTHAIAT Aa F Pag VI 
Sloka. 42.—When Saturn passes through the 4th 
hause, the person will be separated from his friends,wealth, 
wife and others; and everywhere his mind will be wice 
ked, sinful and crooked like the serpent’s crawling. 
The metre is YayFrTAaIt- 
Nyaa safidsit: a 


gaaaritata: Tana ATCHSTTBABT | 
Aentgia: wae Way a afare algeteg wen 


Sloka 43.—When Satura passes through the 5th 
house, one will be bereft of sons and wealth, and will be 
involved in serious quarrels ; when through the 6th, he will 
have his enemies completely subdued, and iwill also be- 
come free from diseases ; he will lick the lips of a char- 
ming damsel. 

‘The metre is Yye!- 

aguataserat ager sa\— 


remeeTy eat TER s Ate sigh: aa Gate: 1 
WANA AreRTANeaRsdeatalaqim eA 


784 . Qeeat@atata, [Adh, CIV. Si. 45-46, 


Sloka 44—When Saturn passes through the 7th 
house, the person will wander away from home; when, 
through the 8th, he will be without wife and children, and 
wil] engage himself in mean activities; when through the 
Oth, he will suffer similar troubles, and his religious duties, 
such as worshipping the sacred fire, will have a break 
through hatred, heart-disease and imprisonment. 

:. “Phe metre is Fazai- 
arutaew auxat aat ar— 


aimaeaasaaas arated: siteta aie | 
PIL ACUL CIE IGC RE CICCRCUICCICIL Gl 
_. Sloka 45.—When Saturn passes though the 10th 
house the person will acquire some position (or work) but 
will suffer loss of wealth, learning and fame; when 
through the 11th, he will develop a sharp temper, will 
have intercourse with others’ wives and also come by 
others’ wealth; when through the 12th, he will get a 
series of the waves of miseries. 
The metre is sf AIaI- 


say at a Meaftar atAarar— | 

: aff arenes 4 wet gagiecaagedy | 
aaa ag & ged a Aaaela Asirava: ued 
Sloka 46.—A planet that bestows by nature beneficial 
results yields its effects in conformity with the Dasa 
period through which the person is passing and with his 
merits. For the cloudy canopy does not release sufficient 
water even for (to fill) the Kudava measure in the spring 

season. 


* Spring i is not :the proper time, “ane the | pEavenn a. proper 


recipient J 
‘Phe metre is fer Aerecht fais. fama). - 


Adh.- CIV, Sl. 47-49.) aqcfasaaaatssara: 785. 


Tht QUAM? HABITATS CIS 
ATA Tala gaa fragqarmange: frag eae: | 
pogey: alee Tea afireratianggATe: qa 
fla: diet a aigarats sala Fate a 1 gagiigituay 

Stoka 47.—The Sun and Mars should be devoutly 
worshipgped with red flowers, copper-coloured perfumes, 
gold, bulls and Bakula blossoms ; the Moon, with cows, 
white flowers, silver and sweet substances; Venus, with 
aphrodisiacs, etc.; Saturn, with blick articles; Mercury,. 
with gems, silver and Tilaka flowers ; Jupiter, with yellow 
things. When these planets are pleased, there will be no 
trouble to the person, even if he falls down from a great 
height or enters the midst of sporting snakes. 

The metre is guRlasitag- (of 26 syllables)- 
aMinazetia aaaaagmaaatyagiataay | 


AEC HO CCRICMEL CICEL ROI 
MPAAUATATIAA! GAA AAIT TTT UV 
Sloka 48.—Ward off the evil effects of malefic 
aspects by the worship of Gods and Brahmins, ‘by propi- 
tiatory ceremonies, Japa (repetition of holy Manthras), 
observances, gifts, self-control and speaking to and as- 
sociating with Brahmins. 
The metre is Sxal- a 1444 one- 
Tay aa AY asl W AAAYUSiMaarara | - 
TAY HARTA: = aaa aa a a 
araiat ci ara waraisma va: | 


a TABATA AMIN Aaa TY NVQ 
Sloka 49.—The Sun and Mars yield results, good or 
bad, in the first halt of the sign travelled, while the Moon 


7.9 99 


486 | _teedftenary fAdh, CIV. SL. 50-82.: 


F aenoeeneel anmememmaemmemeeernentanemestanenemeeineen tence oe ane OY 


and Saturn, in the latter half. The tia-Giti and ssfifa- 
Upagiti varieties of the Arya follow respectively the first 
half and second half of the ordinary Arya in both the 
halves. 

Cf. . a. XXII-6. 


Mal Wes Beas arate area wafa | 
SIMA MOAT AAEATTTT AT U4 ol| 


Sloka 50.—Mercury causes the same effects at the 
end of a Rasi as in its beginning (that is, the same effects 
throughout the sign), just as the number of groups of 
Matras is the same in both the halves of the Upagiti, or 
as friendship with the virtuous. 


Cf. a. a. - ahaa: HeTEG FARIA | 
mana ged Aarracapelisaaen 
x Q@ ° 
WT 24 WN eet a aregat Ta aalg 42h 


Sloka 51.—Jupiter passing through the middle of 
odd houses produces disasters even to the righteous, and 
when through the 6th house, reduces the person to abject 
slavery or degradation, just as all varieties of the arat are 
spoiled by the presence of the #7 in the odd places, but 
it should be found in the 6th group, or it should consist 
of four short syllables, 


Here the author gives the rule about the use of S71 in Arya 
metre, This has been already given in our notes on the 2nd 
Sloka of this Chapter. 


agataiaa: ganet afear qwar- 
AYPAROATA YZACRIGANGTA: | 
ayzagaat anewaga: aa- 
fazaft alas 4 ay AGTH FT TAT 1142: 


~ 


Adh. CIV. SI. 53-55.] ‘aaetenaaatsvara: 787 


Sloka 52.—When a strong benefic is aspected by a 
strong malefic, or when a strong malefic is aspected by a 
strong benefic, his benefic or malefic effects will be neutral- 
ised, just as the (Prakrit) Geetaka and (Sanskrit) Narku- 
taka are equal in all respects. 


The metre ia WHES—ARUTAT Gat a ale Aes gy aAI— 


Aastasa atere ad aa aq citaifaay | 
_ gaseaara aritean: aoiancrgiadang 1430 
Sloka 53.—All the good effects enumerated above 
will be nullified, when the planet under consideration is in 
depression, in an inimical house, is eclipsed, or is aspected 
by an enemy, just as the amorous side-long glances of a 
loving damsel are futile on a blind man. 
The metre is [qara- 
at at aa aerearqs aaa Sait aul aa a Teae I 
agg Mt uaqd ag aaa sq Asagzeay ui 
This isa fa@7Aga- all the four feet are dissimilar. 
AAGASHROTAM TTS? TAZA A | 
THEITRAUAMAaaMay FT ATTA TTATTSSATT NWI 
Sloka 54.—Saturn gives the same effects as the Sun 
does in his transit, while Mercury resembles in effect the 
planet he conjoins with, just as the (Prakrit) Skandhaka, 


follows (Sanskrit) Geeti, Magadhi Vaitaliya and Gatha, 
Arya in metrical! feet. 


iscsi ater sargeraacy | 
fraaqraefa ant wagat a ¢ Tessa Wek 


Sloka 55.—WheneSaturn is eclipsed by the Sun’s 
rays, his power todo harm to human beings increases 
greatly, except in the case of those noble persons who act 


"788 : areiftemia, {Adh, CIV. Sl. 56-59. 


‘righteously, just as bile being greatly vitiated made 
powerful) by men basking in the Sun, tortures them, 
leaving out those careful men who have a regulated diet. 
This is in qe metre, a kind of aa. 
& ma wz Gatang sare wassy Aang aww 
Ast wisisea fry aret wate wafa a sear u 


WEA HAeTAMAMET AIA! | 
aatahraaraaieare £9 THT 4S 
Sloka 56.—The nature of the Moon varies according | 


to the planet she conjoins with, just as the facial ex- 
pression does according to the mental frame. 


' The Moon is the mind of mIwjev. The metre is 447- - 
tt gar i g ea GIG BW araeay CgTa | 
adia awn Aer Tt saat TRA 7: arse a 
e own ‘N 
qay oy adg aad feaqaan: | 
aaTgieat Tagger wha fa: uve 
Sloka 57.—When planets are ill-placed, a man is 


belittled, just as the 5th syllable in all the quarters and 
the 7th in the 2nd and 4th are short in the @t® metre. 


— wBeaTA wyaa TaTe saateras | 
Tala year sls Agr wy! gieaat gat: Wel 
Sloka 58.—A person, though low-born and of 
reprehensible conduct, becomes respectable in the world, 
when the planets are well-placed in transit, just as a short 


syllable occurring at the end of a foot comes to be treated 
as long. : 


aEagaaledg waeataes ge | 
. , fafraRa ata ad arg Sareiatarrargaq 4a 


Adah. CIV. S1.60-61.] agefseeaadiserra: ‘IE0) 


Sloka 59.—If the wise begin a work for achieving 
prosperity when the planets are ill-placed, that itself will 
destroy them, just as the ceremony for raising a goblin, 
done improperly, destroys the doer himself. 

The metre is 47184- This is an #4474 where the first and 
third quarters are Similar. while the second and fourth are of a 
different type. In the odd quarters, there are 14 Matras, and in 
each of the even ones, they are 16 in number. All the four 
quarters-are similar in one respect, vzz., they end in «Gana plus 
‘a short syllable and a long one. Inthe odd quarters, there will 
be 6 Matras remaining outside the Ganas, while in the even ones, 
there will be 8 Matras. 

Bl WZ Gt Maar AYBaISel J aw GA FST: t 

q adisa Gin gead Aa az a feat gat 

aiaaAIey A TET! BS THAT Bis UT | 
ayate a Ties geatasses ne ay WT NG ott 

Sloka 60,——A king, though endowed with little pro- 
wess, Starting on an expedition at the proper time, in 
view of the good positions of the planets, (See XVI-40 
supra) achieves greatness that is eulogised in the scriptures. 

The metre is s19=a7<1HH- It is formed by the addition of & 


long syllable to each of the quarters of the aa. 
qéea at aya Rearssedas qatrenq— 


VTAATNIANIATA Walled RcasqaAaarsieas- 
Aft RanamasaedugalaedamaaayeTs 
Mere Rat qrsaeatersaReae ral Ma eTTATCTT- 


camara eta Saeqa at wat | 


Dandaka 61.—a. On the day presided over by the 
Sun, if he be passing through the 3rd, 6th, 10th or the 
11th house from the Janma Rasi or posited in the Lagna, 
work connected with the following ‘things may be done 


£90 , wer earay [Adh. CIV. SL. 61. 


with advantage: gold, copper, horse, wood, bones, skin, 
woollen articles, mountain, tree, a perfutne called ~@&%, 
shell, serpent, thief, weapons, forest, cruel deeds, service 
of kings, coronation of kings, medicine, silk, trade (jungle 
products), cowherd, physician, stone, fraud, spotless ones, 
famous ones, heroic, famous in battle, one on march and 
fire 


fakesranat Ta arya Rgdesaa yout sa- 
FRSA ITM TIAT Asa FAsAigraqgaynyssNeIaga-._ 
gouameaiaiariys aaa taren yaa aae- 
MMT CMRTSAT ATIF TATTFA Aa At 


Dandaka 61.—b. Ona day presided over by the 
Moon, or when she is in the Lagna or when Kataka is 
rising, or when she is posited in one of the Kendra houses, 
work connected with the following things will be success- 
ful :— ornaments, conch-shells, pearls, lotus and the like, 
silver, water, sacrifice, sugar-cane; eatables, women, milk, 
milk-trees, grass, marshy place, corn, liquids Brahmins, 
path, singing, horned animals, agriculture, etc., comman- 
der of the army, a king who attacks another from behind, 
kings, evincing popularity, nocturnal beings, medicines for 
phlegm, maternal uncle, flowers and clothes. 


faaaaaa afaerita arearaceltia aatitr aati 
aaiautatiMgaNaaaaaaedgaa aR 
CHITA WHAKTY (am HEsTQIE|TAUTTA Fant 
Taqasizatugangtandagieania frerea qa 
Dandaka 61.—c. On the day,presided over by Mars, 


the following things become successful :—- All activities 
connected with mines, ores, etc, gold, fire, corals, weap- 


Adh. CIV. SI, 61.] agitanaadtscara: 701 


ons, cruel deeds, theft, hitting (attacking), forests, fortress- 
es, command of an army, trees with red flowers, other 
red substances, bitter and pungent things, earning wealth 
by fraud and snake-charm, boys, physicians, Buddhist 
monks, nocturnal activities, lord of the exchequer, roguery 
and ostentations. 


eRamtineiqueate set, ara are aWeaaata- 
BMA Vat RIQwA AeA geaaTA AGATA 
AATAMSSYIA TAAL Age Tea Fy sS- 
eTPCUVATIAT AH Hr aka dizaa sysiz 
qT NE 


Dandaka 61.—d. When Mercury is in the Lagna 
or presides over the day, all work undertaken in connec- 
tion with the following things will be crowned with suc- 
cess :—Green articles, gems, lands, perfumes, garments, 
things that are both harsh and mild, drama, Sastra, science, 
poetry, all fine arts, preparation of compounds, mixtures, 
etc., achieving a Mantra, alchemy, arguments, skill, meri- 
torious deeds, observance of vows, messenger, tonics (that 
prolong life), feigned talk, lies, bath, things done in a 
short, moderate and long interval (or short, medium and 


long articles ?) as are the foot-prints on the earth during 
a heavy rain. 


These four pieces of Dandaka are based upon the auza(@yara 
and its longer forms which ordinarily has two 4 Ganas in the 
beginning followed by six < Ganas. The number of t Ganas can 
be increased at will, So, here we have 32 t Ganas, In this con- 
‘nection Pingalacharya says that td and afssq give a different 
name to 4°8gisuq1a, According to them, this variety is termed gay; 
and the others are asdu, cea, Sigg, aelea, YA and agg. There 
are thus 7 kinds of Dandaka. There are no special names for 


tog _ weeditaray [Adh, CIV. SI. 62-63. 


Datidukas which have more than 14 < Ganas, The names accord: 
ing. to Pingalacharya are a4, ava, =e, shya, were, ser and 
2@ in addition to the basic Dandaka called wsafsqaia. As the 
Dandaka gradually increases from 7 t Ganas, it is also called 3iaa@. 


Qwest sas Tae ae Heo gy gaia: 
fRaiagrrqutaaaAannaaeyTyTaa: | 
AqaaaTaAATTAAS Ta TATTSIA AAT 
maeTaaATIA & Prigaenlty gar Veet s TATE TA I 


Dandaka 62,-- On the day presided over’ by Jupiter, 
all things pertaining to the following may be done with 
advantage :—Gold, silver, horses, elephants, bulls, physi- 
cians, medicines, propitiation of Brahmins, the Manes 
and Gods, leaders (infantry), umbrellas, chowries. orna. 
ments, kings, temples (or installation of deities and 
construction of houses), performance of Dharmic acts, 
auspicious ceremonies, Sastras, attractive things, tonics 
(or food that gives strenzth), truthful speech, observance 
of vows, sacrifices, wealth, beautiful and excellent things, 
like a stick with good colours. 

The metre is 44%°S3 of four feet - 4 7 and 7 4 Ganas. 


aygaeaa 4 aaaqgaasaatalasrasaaiaag- 
WMATA: CHSRAIAAANT AT ZAMINATHA- 


ftrasiasiraraania 4 | 


Dandaka 63.-a. On the day presided over by Venus, 
things connected with the following may lead to success :- 
Painting, clothes, aphrodisiacs, courtezans, loving dam- 
sels, sport, laugh, enjoyment of youth, places of attraction 
or.enjoyment, crystals, silver, indulging in amorous activi- 
ties, vehicles, sugar-cane, autumnal crops, cattle, trade, 
agriculture, medicines, and lotus and the like. 


Adh. ‘CIV. Sl. 63-64.]  aqzitveaaatscara: 793 


' aRagaeta a weaeaasiegsicaarediaae 
afasiernfrara sqataaftainanwegeeta arent 
AIM FT aIAAagRT serge Hoy 1G 311 

| Dandaka 63.—b. On the day. presided «over * by 
Saturn, one ought to do work pertaining to the followitig 
things in order to achieve success :—She-buffalo, goat, 
camel, dark metal (iron); slaves, old persons, low-born 
pe irds, thieves, hunters, the immodest, broken.pots, 
sieahantee ching and obstructionist-activities. Otherwise, | 
one will not get even a drop of water in the ocean. 


This whole is in 84azvz4, wich is AACACHLAT AL wi]-ae,, five 
< Ganas having AT! in their middle and @ and if at the end. 


fageraht agi seaiiafars wate araag | 
attauqaaageaae ateharetsa: 1G vl 


Sloka 64.—Although one knows the extensive rami- 
fications of the science of Prosodv, on: cannot do more 
than this (cannot employ other varieties of metres), 
Hence Varahamihira has given this summary or essence 


s metres that are pleasant to hear. 


hiss is in faye, a kind of sal, which is of 3 kinds—(1) 
cae (2) TTAATSI and (3) nafsqar, (1) When, in the ‘first’ “half 
(t. e. between the: first quarter and the 2nd) a word is broken 
(2) when such a breaking occurs in the second half; (3) when 
the break is in both the halves. 
Wea wala gear faa Ageraaa caar: | 
Vaan Healy Mar gia seat: wu 
Hfawagqeatned atis Tsasat earq | 
aaeaaratnrasata Feet: | 
Accotding to the commentator, Varahamihira has “impli- 
fied the rules of Prosody and made them easily intelligible’; besides 
q. &. 100 . 


904 geeatearaia {Adh. CV. Sl. 1-2, 


é 


that he has made them attractive. Here Varahamihira shows 
his erudite scholarship in other branches of science as well, 


In this connection, the reader’s attention is drawn to the 
following examples quoted by e#iquuz, the commentator of the 
BSeaqsaeyT of Pingalacharya, where a remarkable knowledge of 
HeGreat is exhibited : 

mage HME WA EurAao;n Hee 

qTUaereiar ad ava years u 

qe fagiat Ags wat aA Be Griz | 

ayetaaa goat: erara walt gaa ti 

fagafumaaaraals saiatewaty | 

Rates gegeait axait gaara u 

QUA BAB A wala AgiaaltHaer an | 

Ql aaqawdeal Wasaga TTTATTT 

BEN: TAS carer atta aaa sre 

fage S8 sqarit at wa aaAaIS! aA I 

wewarstanls waa wpe eseesd we: | 

faqeraunmatls aaa aTTATSTAT Ht 


This commentator belonged to the 12th century A D. and 
was a minister of king Lakshmanasena of Bengal. 


Thus ends the 104th Adhyaya on the “Effects of the Transits 
of Planets’. 


e on 


STITT 1°41] On the Worship of the Stellar Deity. 


Tet YS THF Cito argat Tears: | 

HE WMUNeIay ye Keyaieray U8! 
wiedt 3 ofrarnataty aie waa aRaen | 
‘gfen taal Adagdsgeat F LN 


Adh. CV. Sl. 3-6.) - Tarederaaatsvara: 795 


qs fafe afist aa Agar eat BT ee: | 
ETT graguen afqara var: TET 
ata sagt sat tact geal ga fear: afar | 
= sarang ata var way ay eH 
Rar sorden fra avers Pyrvreetarat | 
AGAFSTRISS BISA SUS |i 


s 1-5.—The feet of the aaageq (stellar deity) 
are repretnted by the asterism Mula; the shanks, by 


Rohini ; the knees, by Aswini; the thighs, by Purva and 
Uttara Ashadhas; the privities, by Purva and Uttara 
Phaleunis ; the hips, by Krittika ; the sides, by Purva and 
Uttara Bhadrapadas ; the stomach, by Revati ; the breast, 
by Anuradha ;*the back, by Dhanishta ; the arms, by Vi- 
sakha ; the hands, by Hasta; the fingers, by Punarvasu ; 
the nails (of the hands), by Aslesha ; the neck, by Jyeshta; 
the ears, by Sravana ; the mouth, by Pushya; the teeth, 
by Swati; laugh, by Satabhishak; the nose, by Magha ; 
the eyes, by Mrigasiras ; the forehead, by Chitra; the head 
by Bharani; and the hair, by Ardra. In this manner, the 
form of the stellar deity has to be constituted by those 
who wish for good physical features. 

It is a weoll.known rule that in the description of the form of 
divine beings, wé have to begin with their feet, and in the case of 
human beings, with the head. 


Ira TySIy Tera Yous We | 
eae: edea Avy args fyerd | RN 
Sloka 6.—One ought to worship Lord Vishnu and 
the "wages and then abserve fast on the 8th day of the 
dark fortnight in the month of Chaitra, when the Moon 
passes through the asterism of Mula, 


*996 aceite _ [Adh. CV. '$1s1729 


It ig much better if it (the day) also happens to be Monday. 
The above worship itself is called Rupa-Satra (formal sacrifice). 
Of. 7i— 
atesal usATae Hoga | Az | 
aA Wea gy ged g Tuas 0 
TsenTIAAMed Td THleAB: FAT | 
aa Qla age Saaiaaaegarg u 


TAGA AA BIW alsa TaNgag | 
_ ora arated aaa ayaa a Wyi 
Sloka 7.—When the above observance is over, the 
»person should make a pift of a vessel filled with clarified 
‘butter, alone with gold, gems and cloths according to 
,his capacity to a Brahmin who isan expert astrologer 
& ett Nae CN 
HA AIwAHe: asTSlany ayaa 
ANay gated waaay: | 
qIQgiAyla RAITAARAATAALT 
Salq Raa aahsar sora gat aa cit: 
Sloka 8.—A person who wishes for beautiful features 
shail worship and feed Brahmins with food abounding in 
milk and ghee, mixed with jaggery ; he should also pre- 
sent them with gold, cloths, and silver. Then he should 
fast regularly on the days when the Moon passes through 
the several asterisms beginning with Mula and represent- 
ing the various limbs of the aa#geq, and also worship in 
accordance witth Vedic rules both Lord Hari and the 
AAAS. 


Wrage: wyVargn gana: arqwse«qea: | 


ITT KAVITA: Sifraal wraesala: ute 
Sloka 9.—One who has performed the above wor- 
ship will have (in the next birth) long arms (touching the 


Adh/OV.sS! 10-13] vanfvesaaaissara: A9y 


‘Aehees), broad’ and muscular breast, moon-like face, white 
‘and beautiful teeth, the gait of a lordly elephant; ‘tony 
‘eyes resembling the lotus, an appearance captivating :the 
hearts of damsels and a body verily like that of Cupid -- 


UAW AaqTaacagel aisaqearat | 
SPaCITA THT Wallatairns Haz Voll 
_ genieaaaan aight yates | 


a eATTTT RET meraTaaar ATAT 112 Vu 
. BIVlawTrare: Fat aaa Taar | 
Slwerelsqrar vals WATT Basay 122 
Slokas 10-12.—A woman who performs the worship 
ag prescribed above will be born with a face as bright’and 
spotless as the autumnal full Moon, eyes'like the petals of 
lotus, beautiful (and sparkling) teeth, firie ears, hairs re- 
semblng the belly of the bees, a voice as sweet as that_ of 
an intoxicated cuckoo, red Ips, hands and feet as tendér 
‘atid charming as lotus-petals, a slender waist bendirg 
‘under the weight of the bosoms, a navel with turns, from 
left to right, thighs similar to plantain trees, fine buttocks 
and éxceillent loins She will win the love of her:hys- 
band, and have well-knit toes. She may also be borh,a 
man. : : 


Mae as a Tate ATA 
arraaaya Aaa ae dtasEsTITT | 
SVN THe wala fe atrateregaeanhy ya 
AA AAA AAT ATA TAT TT TAs 12 


Sloka 18.—Such,a person—man or woman—will 
become a star and move with the stars in the sky as long 
as the clusters of stars illumine the world, while moving 


798 geedigarary §=[CV. 14-16, CVE. 1. 


in the sky till the end of the creator's day, @. ¢., Kalpa. 
And when the universe is recreated, the person will be- 
come an intelligent monarch ; and will be reborn in the 
world as a king or a wealthy Brahmin. 


ATAUA RITANTATATTTT AMT TT | 
eyagqacarea Ate aTAaT UV 
aftarna dear agiihas Tras | 
AMAT FAI HAN AAI GaaAwa_ Ux 
Slokas 14-18.—The twelve lunar months beginning 
with Margasirsha are said to be presided over by Kesava, 
Narayana, Madhava, Govinda, Vishnu, Madhusudana, 


Trivikrama Vamana, Sridhara, Hrishikesa, Padmanabha 
and Damodara respectively. | 


Sloka 15, last quarter—alaar ATA ST is another reading 


MaaaTATha a seaig Afrag watiay | 

ead aaaqsa aad ala aa a PR aeasa aaq tau 
Sloka 16.—One who fasts on the 12th days of the 

several months and worships Lord Kesava with his res- 

pective names attains His position, where there is absolu- 

tely no fear of re-birth. (He becomes one with Him or 

attains emancipation). 


Thus ends the 105th Adhyaya on the “Worship of the 
Stellar or Deity.” 


STARITCATT? 112 o§]] Conclusion. 


SUfaiMeage 1aea ataacacfkonse war | 
WSRASHKE BWATAEs aARaA 12 


Adh. CVI. Sl. 2-43 aafaacranatscara: 799 


Sloka 1..-Having churned the ocean of Astrology 
with the 4*a% mountain of my intelligence, I have taken 
out the Moon of Science (correct knowledge) that affords 
light to the world. 

The idea is brought out here beautifully through a metaphor. 


This means that this 4a contains the quint-essence of the whole 
soience of Astrology-cum-Astronomy. 


— TGS: Flat AAT Bray | 
ATTA | TIA KIAIS THAT? UR 


Dosh 2. —I have not discarded the works of ancient 
seers while writing this Sastra or scientific work. Hence, 
O Ye good men! You may by all means compare mine 
with theirs, and accept whichever you like. 


Awa FIAT gaa: wala arartargal wt | 
ataatzatia: Hlatita arerargary U3 


Sloka 3.—Or, a good man finding some excellence 
(virtue), though slender, in an ocean of faults, proclaims 
that (virtue), while a mean-minded man does contrari- 
wise (finding a small fault in an ocean of excellences, he 
proclaims the fault alone). This is the nature of the 
good and the wicked. 


qlagayad Berga Patearate 
aaltasd ACA waa lvl 


3S 
Sloka 4.—The gold of poetry being heated by the 
fire of wicked men becomes purified. Hence, it should 
be shown (read) to the wicked by all means, 


wu yeqqaisal araala 
VRUAYAATATHIMAARAM | 


806 queitaram == (CVI. 5-6, CVIT 1. 


‘ABI AAT FHAASTNASTHA at 
ary aaa ga ate way 4h 

Sloka 5.— Whatever point of this work gets lost or 
altered in the course of its circulation by the fault of 
scribes or of students receiving oral instruction from the 
learned, may kindly-be supplied or sct right by scholars 
avoiding jealousy ; so too, whatever I have ill-done, done 
niggardly, or not®done at all. 


eaatgiqeanainagaaaieaaacy | 

MATTE AISA TANT: 1811 
+, , Sloka 6.—With my intellect rendered quite ptre 
(clear)— for with intelligence caused by the favour] on 
account of salutations offered tu the feet of the Sun (and 
other planets), the sages such as Vyasa and my preceptor 
(i,e, my own father arizazrt), | have only summarised 
(or given the essence of) this science. [EIence I make 
obeisance to the ancient authors. 


fo4y 


Thus ends the 10th Adhyaya on “‘ Conclusion ’”’ AP 


Tlargweani ll2owll Table of Contents 
in this Science 


‘ 


lhis chapter must have been composed by somebody else. 


TAMIA: GT AIWATART AIT | 
”" BRragaagaqeadaea yaaa = 021 


Sloka 1.—Introduction of the science is the first 
chapter in this work; next come the astrolopical rules 
(or the rules of astrologers); next, the transit of the 


Adb. CVI. Sh 2-5.]  aerivsaeasitscara: gor 


Sun ; next, that of the Moon; next, of Rahu ; then, of 
Mars, of Mercury; of Jupiter, of Venus, of Saturn and 
of the Ketus. (Altogether 11 chapters). 
et e 
AUTCATAS ATT FT RAAT | 
aaa sya qealmaresaey URI 
Stoka 2.—The 12th chapter deals with the Transit 
of Agasthya, (13) the next one, with that of the Great 
Bear (seven sages), next ; (14) with Nakshatra Kurma 
Vibhaga (Divisions of the country belonging to the Stars; 
next (15) with the Nakshatra Vyuha ; next (16) with the 
places and objects belonging to the several planets ; and 
next, (17) with planetary conflicts. 
TENANT AEWVICTES Ait 7 | 
qeedaal waar mwa Bz 3H 
Sloka 3.——The next chapter (18) is on the Moon's 
conjunction with the planets ; next (19), on the years pre- 
sided over by planets and their effects; next (20), on 


planetary positions in the form of 312% configurations; 
and next (21), on the pregnancy of clouds. 


TTT HarTeTIT ARITA 
gga: gqasae aeeal Fag (eat ate: en 
Sloka 4.—The next (22) is on the retention of rain- 

water by the clouds; next (23), on the quantity of Rain- 
fall; next (24), on Rohini-Yoga; next (25), on Swati 
Vous > next (26), on Ashadha Yoga; nxt (27), on Vata 
Chakra or Bhadrapada Yoga; next (28), on immediate 
rain; next (29) on flowers aed creepers ; next (30), 
signs at’twilights ; next (31), glow at the horizon. 


. Freaehivegd gwarcayi | 
_ alah pata: lad WH 


en 101 


802 —— qercifteray [Adh, CVII. SI. 6-8, 


Sloka 5,—The next (32) chapter deals with earth- 
quakes ; the next (33), with meteors; the next (34),¢with 
halos round the luminaries; the next (35), with rain-. 
bows ; the next (36), with aerial city; the next (37), 
with Mock Suns; the next (39), with portentous thunder; 
the next (40), with the growth of crops; the next, (41), 
with the classification of substances ; the next (42), with 
fluctuation of prices. 


VR eqATAITAaRAHMITaaa Al! 
TIUNATRISIAIT MAS AT TET LGM 
Sloka 6.—The next (43) chapter deals with the 

glories of Indra’s banner ; the next (44), with lustration 
ceremony ; the next (45), with wagtails; the next (46), 
with portentous phenomena ; the next (47), with Mayura 
Chitraka (or motley miscellany); the next (48), with 
royal ablutions; the next (49), with royal crowns; 
the next (50), with swords; the next (53), with archi. 
tecture. 


TTAB ARARTISASIT HTS | 
MAAMATATTAT: FATAL AAGT F (ll 
Sloka 7.—The next (54) chapter deals with the ex. 

ploration of water-springs ; the next (55), with the treat- 
ment of trees; the next (56), with the description of 
temples; the next (57), with adamantine glue; the 
next (58), with is ; the next (59), with entry’ into the 
forést ; and the next (60), with installation of idols. 


Pas carta gat geecquingedag Tl 
qaqaaaain: Prag THAese: llcll 


Sloka 8.—The next (61) chapter treats of the signs 
of cows; the next (62), of dogs; the next (63), of cocks ; 


Adh. CVII. SI. 9-12.) aaizenaasitscara: 808 


the next (64), of tortoises; the next (65), of goats; 
the‘next (68), of men ; the next (69), of five kinds of 
great men ; the next (70), of maidens; the next (71), 
of omens from slits of garments. 
QUASI Saat AY Fans F | 
Hea Hgowayparaeaagaaaar lS 
Sloka 9.—The next (72) chapter treats of chowries ; 
the next (73), of umbrellas ; the next (74), of praise of 
women ; the next (75), of winning of affection; the 
next (76). eergtic remedies ; the next (77), of ig ee 
the next (78), of sexual union; and the next (79), of 
couches. 
a A 
TAMA PHCATAY TAUTATHTT | 
AIA SYN qeaylaa Alga AT Noll 
Sloka 10.—The next (80) chapter treats of gems 
(diamonds) ; the next (81), of pearls; the next (82), of 
rubies ; the next (83), of emeralds ; the next (84), of 
Jamps; the next (85), of toothesticks; and the next 
(86), of omens through birds and beasts. 
aaa ed Ted Ferry Brava | 
ai aaraaat asaarat aq Ta Uke 
Sloka 11.—The next (87) chapter treats of the 
circle of Quarters; the next (88), of cries of birds and 
bedsts; the next (89), of the circle of dogs; the next 
(90), of the cries of jackals; the next (91),of the move- 
ments of wild animals ; the next (93), of horses ; the next 
(94), of elephants; the next (95), of the cries of crows; 
and the next (96), of further omens. 


el ATATURK Acasa: | 
Tag Het Brat THTTSTA UA 


804 _ gueeitarera [Adh. CVII. Si. 13-14. 


Sloka 12.—The next (97) chapter treats of the 
time of fruition of effects; the next (98), of the fsunc- 
fions and qualities of the asterisms; the next (99), of func- 
tions and properties of the Tithies ; and the next (100), 
of the qualities of the Karanas; the next, of the effects 
of birth in the several asterisms; the next (104), of the 
transits of planets; andthe last, the worship of the 
stellar deity. 


| BCR IDI MICCUCE RIC ETC E 
WA MRACAOMAR TATA 12 Bir 


Sloka 13.—Thus have the above one hundred chap. 
ters been listed in regular order and verses equivalent 
to 3900 ones of the Sloka metre have been composed in 
this work. 

The commentator says that this number does not include the 
verses of chapters on qivas, aqiaa, Wzneat, agen, and TAMAYO, 
They being included, it will be 4000 verses. 

xs QC o AN 6 ~ 6 
BATT YS WAT MMA FT TATA | 
e e . bp 
TAG MIRTH BCT A AT AAT WL 

Sloka 14.—This work contains matters relating to 
journey (rar) ; the work bearing that name gives fuller 
details that are not mentioned here, I have already written 
the Brihat Jataka, containing very many wonderful mate: 
rials, also the Karana (tarqaiagr) which has been en- 
logised by many. » 

_ Thus ends the 107th Adhyaya onthe “Table of Contents im 
this science. | 
Vee 
ef ott: 


4 


WeAGP RL 


A Adhyaya Sloka Adhyaya Sloka 

viii 53 | arewercfast x 20 
SARIN RATA xc «2 | audttcasittar Ixxxviii 26 
TANT: WIV xc 649 wadteareart—ilxxxi 7 
TAT: eer xlvii 69 | wedtegueata: = viii 32 
afarmen "Ys. Jxviii 110 | avert xxix 6 
ana a Ixxxvii 3] | afawer Ixviii 5] 
aaa: Tyat xxviii 22 | afar xxix 45 
THAT xlvi 78 | stferate: xlvi 34 
AHL LAT hi 61 | stare xlii | 
areca xiii 10 | aretteeeta xciii TT 
AFSTAS |! | orgiterezon liv 52 
agate xix 18 | senerferes Ixxvi 12 
TESTA hit 99 | sreavafeerat —xevii 12 
TFTA: lvii 20 AOL ATATATE (OO 
TETAS bx 14 | coger xxvii 15 
ayEaa evil 42 | sree lxxvii 17 
AEST li 37 | aperrserea ix 17 
ats: xlvii 23 TMU Sp leh ix 2| 
afseernater xxxv 3 AMTITTTAST ix 19 
ahoacel xliii 58 | astarea cvii 14 
AAA Wary lv 5 | sentfta ix ll 
AHI SEIT: xliii 54 | rer er aaa lvii 34 
ATIF xiv 2 | tar g water v 6 
AAT A liy 121 | ater efearer xiv 11 
a sraqalfir Ixxxv 2 | ote Gay Ixxxvii 33 
AILS xix 22 | errqresatat = lii_15 


_ Adhyaya Sloka 


aT qaeat XIV 
AT WYT xlv 
array Saray evi 
OR XXIV 
sagt aarat = xlviii 
aera erarte 
AITFETAT F 
AATTAT EAT: Ixv 
a fercrsan xl viti 
aepatesart iii 
TITS xxii 
ort haere xlvi 
ATSAT vill 
ATITT XXXviil 
afetrenrey xlvi 
afafreraea XCV 
serrarare: Vv 
ahreara litt 
aeistteyt = xxxii 
AIT SSA XXIV 
agers a XXX 
wag xi viii 
ag XCili 
area li 
AOAC li 
Aa evii 
eaCAU Ixxxi 
HMA xvii 
wrTaa v 
HTS citi 


Adhyaya Sloka 


A viii ® 
AAT WT: Xxi 
ae: aftogalens : cv 
WTA AAT Ixxxvi 
SIMA SAT xc 
seaat xlvi 
EAT Xi 
TeYT Ixxix 
TITTY ¢ ix 
Tat at xsi 
APTA xxiii 
HATHA xxiv 
TANT xCV 
ATA xlvi 
AVTATAS Xl 
ATTRA fefer IXxXvil 
aqcent aftr XIV 
ATTLAT TATATT 1X 
STU Xi 
aT F ixxxvii 
aatsett xl viii 
area li 
TTTTT xlvi 
ATA EZ Ixxxvi 
ATA XXX 
TTETH Ixxxi 
ALTHTS CIV 
ATHTTA ii 
aroTRRTeET li 
STATA ii 
ATS lxxxvi 


52 
1 


ili! 
Ixxxviii 
XCV 
XXXil 
XXX 
IXxxv 
Xvi 
IXXxXXvit 
xliv 
xhiii 


3 


Adhyaya Sloka 


4 | WTSI 
20 | wafer 


xl 

liii 
Ixxxii 
liv 
Ixxix 
Ivili 
xvii 

» XXX 
xlvi 


Ixxxvili 
xviii 
lv 


Adhyaya Sloka 


Adhyaya Sloka 


Cll 
XCViil 
xli 

xl 
Ixviii 
lviii 
lviti 
lviti 
xl viii 
xliii 
liti 
liti 
lviii 
lvii 
Ixxix 
xi 


4 


7 | aiearsr liv 
54 arareor X 
26 | Tater XCVii 
1 TATASTS xi 
4 attend renga Ixxiv 
6 | ST] 
3 “aren Ixxiv 
105 | srarcureft Ixxxviii 
6 : Rao XCVII 
arse xl viii 
“ ART SHA xcii 
5] orearrie Xcvi 
43 SIE OC ICT Ixxxvii 
55 UTAY STAT ATA: XXxii 
5g | TRAa aia i 
aaa - 
se arate XIV 
anazae reer XXiv 
2 | aATTTST XCV 
56 | avatars . 
15 | 3 > WAii 
25 | aTSTaa: xl viii 
62 | Arartararegzr Be 
5 | warsrara Ixi 
4 AKAGAH AT xlvj 
57 | aearaatcater ixxy 
33 | strenrecte Ixxy 
2 | MTaAsE XI viii 
50 | atfeergenfir xv 
24 | arfterrereray xviii 
7 arbeey TAT x 


Adhyaya Sloka 


36 


5 
Adhyaya Sloka 


aieey AMeNTTT xv «5 | araet xlviii | 74 
enterreta xciv 10} sac ciii 11 
PCat Bas] CaI Ixxviii 12 | @Icara xvi 20 
BIALATSHANTT? civ 50 | actey Ixxxy 5 
COTE viii 34 | Meera xciii 6 
sneer tretar vii 27 | archeferferter xelii 13 
BT: TATT viii 43 | aTHTay 1 25 
TTT: viii 31 | ATHY liv 116 
ATA xi 40 | MART xxviii 2 
AY RAT Ixxxii 11 | aetengta vii 5 
WMATA TT xvi 30 | Mawmara xv 10 
ATTA TACT: li 49 | Strerjerrarty civ 51 
SUCRE liv 20 | Serva aur xxiv 8 
MITTSCET Ixxxvili 13 | avaftaartayen: v 64 
AYES Ixxxviii “43 josie xiv 33 
ANT ATARI ii 48 | araTtt v 2 
anaife ifr xlviii 72 aad ata xi 50 
aeaga ge x 14° “amaaien aa xiv 16 
aera xv 18 | sTarey xlviii 22 
TAa aaa ix 33. ATaerdae: xviii 21 
BATT T At xevi 5 “meme XXxill 2] 
AAA ST Ixxiv 20 | SeTAacorAS xliv 16 
are arrieratar: i 5 | eretrererte fre iii 1 
AMISH AT vy 38 | aPaATE ix 28 
ATALATRT xxxix 3 | eegaea sae viii 14 
amnaiarse wii 1 | avtfserererrecr vii 6 
BATAATTATT iii 94 | ITNT v 77 
STS ae xxix 11 | adidas xxvii 6 
MTPITIST svi 23 | ae sarees viii 11 
ATTA xxx 23 | areveatdter xvi 15 
re a ix 4 | sree aa xxvi 1 


Adhyaya Sloka 


ATATRATNTT xvi = 3 vhitasa Ixxxvili 
BTA: lii 86 | TexearKe: sii 
aeate : xiii 3 | PUraeTHernedict ci 
aretha: i 6 | parquet ivi 
MAA ATATHt liv 24 s 
sredeaaaiaad wii 15 
miktranaye ix 35 Fresrerrgye Viil 
stag rafers: xv 24 | STOTT Ixxx 
c Se SSuy Xii 
g Sqrrqrneag - — Ixix 
qandiera xvi 4 | SUTaNaTS Ixxix 
TRTSCS HATA xi 58 | Stymrareafears ci 
reatttry li 23 z 
reaete Hii 114 | SC eaat _ 
fa faarftat i 44 | eran a‘ 
efa freafaan: Hi 101"... ; sees 
wh aerapta xliii 
fe Fagus ae eefirqfareet xi 
ran : a Bx. JS —— xvii 
ES oe aTerenrcaht Xcvill 
TAIN xiviiit 71 Sethe es 
raraye Ixxxvili 45 3 eg 
oe? ‘ Ixxvill 
Trad ZT 1 23 er 
, Wr: SU Ixxxix 
a bb xi 9) eorereerdert iii 
ear cart xi 10/” 4 we 
eeraciatte: liv 69 STATE PTT ” 
gepeasitig errata xiviii 78 | -PSTaeaA GM li 
vacas dist evi, 6 | rrr iii 
crated xv 14 |,,.wa faarftien v 
crenata vii 45 | rer eet xiv 
OUVAVTTS A v2 | reenter werent liv. 
carafaegrrges inxvii 5 |,.weragere liv 


6 


Adhyaya Sloka | 


Adhyaya Sloka 


39 
31 
11 


7 


Adhyaya Sloka | Adhyaya Sloka 
SUC: ABAT = xviii 3 | Vat Haha Ixx 25 
werctemeritan oxxxii 15) ,,f&a: wander: o 4 


a 


ATTAR IT ii. 112 | feet ate xxiv 31 
CT TATTAT ii 5! ee deer xevi 3 
PT EATAM xvii 9). ener Ixx 17 
1 TCATT TTA ix 6! ate tqareey xliii 13 
aca xlvii 4, , rrevarferoret xvi 28 
ACHAT WH: ix 8 | THT iv 24 
AIT WTS . litt 37 |, oaTSyATOT xix 19 
.qaaterhaeacee: xliv 26 | , Sree: Ixviii 20 
iweQantTs i 9 fF i 


 HAATSSE iv 8 
rela arforer xivi 99 
FATTY ATATAAA xciii 1 
' evi 7 
TTaaaara Ix 20 
LANGA SENATTH liv 12 
TTS fasrdyet Ixxxvit 45 
TTT gaiee Xxxvl 1 


aaa: Ixviii 70 
aaa xlvi 97 
FATT: iii. 77 
eareraterrtel ixvii 1 
TINT civ 61 
»Taarer Ixviii 100 
TAAL Ixix 13 
Lame sae ii gg | Wacagratt = xiii. 68 
TNT WET xi 29 | ahearce xiii 8 
TMNT viii 15 | -Tattaat xlvi 42 
PS CELL Ixxxix 5 
FETT ITE Ixxxv 8 


sTAVATNETT = =—soxvi 17 


Adhyaya Sloka , 


senthreeaere: xi 
 werafeattarar v 
watearcte Frater xxxiii 


SOT Shar a wet liv 
»ATntSh IXxxvii 
Zh 
HTT HAT lxx 
FEARS viii 
weg fate: Ixxxvii 
ranks sii 
RATA AST: XCV 
Raters \ 
PAT ATTATSTAT tii 
| 
saraticat Vil 
ayes fearear Vil 
mafaratraracat iii 
MACATTAA Aa xlvi 
MITT ATARI xlvi 
ara harcrecaizy xv 
QW 
CHAGAS: xiv 


wRassayaa xviii 


Ixxix 


: XX 
CHAMATTA: — ixxxvi 
CHEM: TS TY liv 
CHA ATTA: ii 


Ad vava Sidka 


61 | THT xiii 47 
93 | array fare viii 48 
g i manrrarararaat = ivili 37 
94 “merrdtrnraire Ixxxi 36 
22 scareffattaniter lili “42 
| Cher gabe TAT ATR: liv 2 
3 | CRATEMTTTOT ixxxix 10: 
17 | TaaTATERATAT = ixxix 28 
“ CHAT: Ixviii 81 
THTETY a viii 22 
i CRRA ATT Ixxvii 18 
caners aad Xi 4 

oy | Caer aera Ixviii 12 

| carer ii 6:19 
Ixxxviii 41 

cangramnt xviii 82 
: | caagrearet liv 89 
| AZO AMAT Ixxxt 18 
a | carrera tf Ixxxi 30 
g | careaareratet liv 111 
maz aorgisa liii 54 
45 | era: SMS ly 5 
65 | at afe giarar liv 51 
38 | TY ey ATTA ENT v 91 
op | Ta: airearer: Wii 2 
32 TSRTETNAATT Ixxvii 32 
6 wae aa © ixxxviii 10 
64 (TaQUTST ly 3 
82 Ls wai aera xvi “10 
24 i wet fercenrererafta ixxvili 2 


Adhyaya Sloka | 


g 
Orr TS ita 1xxx 
ger CITHSA tat = xxxii 
oeretatter fircort iv 
OFA WHATSy x 


wa A 
OFT WEQIeY BAT xxiii 


UsesTaaaAMaAs — lxxxvi 
oer qracre: Vv 

, 2 SCA XCV 
Orarife farenearat Ixxxvil 
Qenriiz ates lost lx 
UUMaAACHAA AT Ixxxi 
aT eA aT Ixxxvil 
CAAT T HT Ixxxvii 
PCUCICILY staat xxvii 
rerentrg ater liii 
tanea; Sayre liii 
Cae TISTHT — lxxxvii 
warreat temas xiv 
earreai ea XCV 


tory reat 


at 


Ixviii 


WAT HT xy 

we: apa levi 
at 

arattarcakrsh sy xi 
co 

THAT tiv 

RS TISATT liv 

3 


9 


Xiv 

RERNETRT lexi 
| HHAMATET Xl 
 ReSTH: TENE liv 
pitch a shrar = 
weumraaget wii 
“Rglaacararaaq xy 
mista Hehe: mov 
CAA 1) TET xxix 
muha = _xcy 
RSET TAT liv 
!  HUSTEAITUETA Iviii 
ROTTS hi 


marae WUATTA xxxviii 


2 ETA: xl viii 
?  HITSTHIUS ae: cv 
8! ETERS TT XXIV 
ae RMT TAT Ixx 
16 | efefreraaTArat xx 
ot BPUMaaTR AAT xii 
24 RTA TRCONTAST lv 
= “afte: MITA 
RUATRTTAT  lxxxviii 
23 | | HATA TMT xcix 
52 “gaaacafraa: iii 
eects xiviti 
largeftat UT xviii 
59 Hunaeaas XCV 
SCHUITSTHATTT 
76 | SRECATANTAT xviii 
119 | wftorare fea xxix | 


Adhyaya Sloka 


12 


LO 


Adhyaya Sloka 


acerca Ixvili 95 
Ro HAA Sy Ixxi 4 
HUansee xev 5] 
athinirarngat 


RTT IIS — xiii ' srferient xxi 
RICAN SATA : Ixxvii 14 | Btoterreorrgferer XCV1 
aie Ixx 9 meee: XCVI 
HNSARTS xiv 13 HTTrarecr y 
SARIS = viii «7 TATA Ixxvii 
Hacqnaeaa lix 1 | wittedtiowa 2 | ixxiv 
wens Ixxxi 28 | Ie Vv 
SICHISETRIS OT liv 42 ane oaahy vii 
SAAT AA SHAT civ 45 | BUT FITAT v 
RAAFATS IATA Ixxxvi 47 | arajeregere xl 
BURST Ixxix 8 BREAST iv 
rages v 29 Br «sh ai KCV 
ROMECENANHAST civ 16 RATT c 
ROUT Ixviii 46 | RITTER E xcv 
RONAN sliv 11 | Sabrayarat iviii 
HEMT xliv 20 | water Iviii 
HSCATAATENAT Ixxxvi 63 _scfisegatarrar \viii 
HELIA HT lxxxvii 35 | RIORYATR Ixxix 
ROAR: Ixix 36 | HISHAR HU xxix 
BOTTA TTT v 79] xii 
HHTRSHSINATA liv 122 xxxit 
RYWMAATATISAM ixxxii 4 | BTRATCHTTL v 
BATTTMTHYST xxx 12 | TAT 

alvaahre xiii 55 | Pafeprerset xlifi 
eEray eee: viii 44 farrafrozeat Xxxii 
sirkrnrmmeres = xcy «50 | feafafirergarae iii 
AURLTEITY xev 57 | Rrenrenqcarrser xxi 


| Adhyaya Sloka 


4 Ixxx 
| BTarearaearead: XCV 
‘ erareea carat liv 


| 4 | MAMRSITTITS = xlviii 


15 
33 
19 
14 
36 
12 
15 
56 
35 
18 
80 


Adhyaya Sloka 


i eDOCS 
HAPATST 
rater 
ara: 
arcana: 
RET 

1 ERATE 
»OTTA EAT 
 FATTTATSA LAT 


$ 


Ixxxviil 
Ixxxviii 
XIV 
IXxxviil 
xcvil 

Xl Vili 
xivi 
Ixii 
Ixa 


Ixxxvi 


Ixv 
IXXKIx 
lix 
Ixix 
Xl 
Ixxix 


laTetfarsteat x 


ta scathing 
PUSEATTTST 
OTA 
 SAPLTAT: 
Tee 
NAINA 


APTA 


v 
cil 
XVI 
Ixxxil 
xiii 
xl viii 
C 

ii 


Xxxiil 


11 


22 Ixxviii 
21 TUT xvi 
10 ) a : aR XXX 
16 | s RPTL liii 
7:  ,SATAITT xl viii 


BATTEN hii 

1 Fra liv 
3 EATATRE | 
10 wroraaht Ixxix 
31 rc XCIV 
53 EROTTRT i 
1, Beare xlviii 
pails - 
(CALS 1V 

7 | Bravenet = 
; | BRT fi 
HUATIAH vii 
HuITVSa sty lili 

30 | serene . 
7 | guasterendtare lxxxi 
42 HITT: ixxxi 
6 | pooraTa seahaee: xiv 
31 Ixxxvili 
2 3] Ixxxvi 
51 | erarara XXXV 
11 | Saurfirad xxiii 
3 | Sree xxi 
2 | RAPATTAT MT XVII 
20 ReanyrT7 XXKVii 


Adhyaya Sloka 


10 


co -7 U1 ww bho 


Adhyaya Sloka 


Ixxviii 


“oekilant lxxix 


STacetcants yi, 
farrertarara Xiv 
niga aaer: IXxxviii 
elorrerget IXxxvii 
rare Ixviii 
TT XVi 
arenes XVii 
RST xlvil 
atatrersfireraehr jy 
ata lxxxvii 
aicahrracrort ix 
RITE XV1 
wate zy IXxxviii 
RENE Gt xii 
RATT & Ixx 
fererarer ate xix 


xcv1 


UTA w a Ixxxvi 
9 ; lxix 
arrears es XCV 
an Melba 3 Ixxxvi 
atamateemt iyi 
qatrg xciii 
Bracaegity: viii 


12 


25 | a atrTeaTy xi 
14 | ,,feraverhire xix 
26 | .. Aart ater xviii 
25 | ater viii 


5 | nt Tats liy 
g | tare l 
14 | CRT liv 
2? | Pafenzy XXXxii 
S| rar : 
39 | fren XIX 
25 | Hier xl vi 
30 | QE Xciv 
29 | ot Ta: Ixxvi 
30 | COTEAT Ixxvi 
62° itr any Ixxy 
22 yt lv 
6 : SCT TAT lil 
33 | ATCA XXXIV 
ios | aR aT: ii 
| acy iv 
68 | ata WT: XXVI 
34 | ererentcagear Ixxxvi 
62 | easrentaatta xxxiii 
21 | a 
6 
7 | walters li 
28 alicteliale Ixxxix 
13 | & xIv 
5 agieattor lxix 
15) @prarareat iii 


Adhyaya Sloka 


21 


Wvslam: 
efecraratt 


waist Faz 
wanmeafartac 
qa arearfeey: 


TT 
= ° 

SHAT 

WET: 

ether Bayh 

cat fartrer 


ereahy 
ATA 
fa eer 


13 


Adhyaya Sloka 


Adhyaya Sloka 

xlvii 24 | Tre firferarc “i. G 
xliv - 12 | ,,avéter: xcii 
Ixviii 111  Reeetaier xxviii 6 
xcv 82° , feat XVi 37 
liv 101 | eR: ge ae 
liv 58) ,,ftRrec ui ay 
xliv 22 | ,,feereerstr xvi 6 
xiv 6, tara xlvi 61 
Ixxix 31 sfrearfast xlvi 91 
WIG Wes Ixxvii 9 
SAUITET Bet Ixxxi 12 

Ixxxvi 35 »SYUQraT xliii 38 
civ 44 55 xvii 16 
Ixxix 19.  SOTaa Sater Xvi «13 
viii 20 |, @yWATTT ix 37 
xlviii 75; eta xlvi 11 
xiii 8 » lvi 18 
XCVil 13. xlvi 70 
xev 25 |  TATSATCUT Xxx 6 
lvi 24 | | CATT TAG T liii 67 
Ixxxviii 8 | ISS sST xlv 8 
xxi 35 | SACs lili 90 
li 38 | ATA xlv 5 
xxi 34 | | ee TATA sli 13 
xxi 18 | ,,foreretearat 1 7 
iii 16 | oJ xix 6 
xxi 25 / ,,at: Taratse v 36 
xii 63. | ,,F= xcv 35 
xxyvi 4! at earearat ci 13 
xiv 28 | »TANAALSMA = xxiv 35 
iv 23 | ,,arfirerrer fererat: Wii 7 


14 
Adhyaya Sloka 


Talk OE | xcvli 9 
OTHSAN: xlvi 63 
ATTRA LATA Ixxxvi 22 
SMILIES] Ixxxvii 39 
anicferafeater sli 16 
weTaVta ii 13 
UST GTA cvi 5 
pkarguaert liv 81 
FUSIMSIMTT ji 2 
TATA ASTM: =v 4G 
wae ateatiarat v 27 
el sratfer fare: v 63 
»SmrTTa v 66 | 
» CaTyaey: CVli 35 
TAIT AANT XX 5 
erates = xlvili, 26 
WAST AY . ixxxix 18; 
pAlCIQQayT Tey Ixxxvi 10, 
9 AIC TTT FT Ixxxvi 6 ! 
eeTteeat Ta: xxxix 14 | 
MITETA Ixxxvi 40 | 
heb dha: xcvi 7 | 
flarsaer sratr cv 4 | 
sfiitcat ii 26 
qeqareayr Ixviii 80 
CAAae Ixxix 33 
abl eT Ixxvii 13 
darhicits ae lv 7 
Torres li 3: 
orrere feast are , hk 
NSN ATMs ixi 15 


Adhyaya Sloka 

| 
WHAT: _ 7 
TATE Ixviii 47 
FST TAT Ixvili 92 
SACHS MTG: viii 8 
satya: xlix * 3 
ITS Tate Ixviii 56 
 averaateraat lviii 54 
gat civ 21] 
Gage civ 42 
Sarat wayaaft ix 36 
Stat: xlvi 55 
Lqtpas lvi 10 
ANCA vii 13 
, canttare tara lviii 24 
TANTS TAT liii 10 
 ctarfoyeather viii 26 
» PATATa TOIT XXxil «8 
earaaearaa = xlvili 45 
TS SATE xliv 9 
TATSRIRT — xxvii 30 
wea ate xviii 2 
29 liv 110 
FET STRT: v il 
TOMA cd 3 
TRH: xxix 8 
» TUTEEATRN TTT Xvi 3 
sTISTSHMTH xvi 18 
moet wag: xxxii 28 
: 7 xxxii 17 


15 


Adhyaya Sloka Adhyaya Sloka 
arg Tetsu lii 12] Seat gq v 74 
Te xlii 10! @ t oxcey 7 
ED ICE Xxxv 7 3) 


¥ 2 ie : SAAT xevii 11 
CTI civ 40 » TETTAPETR Ixxi 13 
 CRITTRRTER: «s y) | 1 TETAT AA xliti 57 
" ; sa TR TTT xiii 63 
UITaT: TREAT: vi 12 | re 
» mfartarcarea XXXIV 4 i ae it 111 
4 
5. 


TIAA 
TR BT Ixxxvili 2 ai: , a b 
Fatattererneaast me lusts beg 
ahah IXxXXViil 29 Pal i bla Ixviii 89 


, Pafeterarez: Ixxxvili 14 aq aay 44 
Faaaraatey Ixxxvi 60° ste x TATFTAT xliti 21 


Tarzan: vic 95° | FIRM TaTaAy xliii ly 
 STSATATST YT: ad 8 TIS z liti 85 
OT SOSA ev (5 J MASHOST xev 38 


TS xi 57 | PaISeralTey Ixviii 61 


ve THAT cvii 8 | S| 

wh TET MTT liv 64| Wwe ifs 
& URN lxxxvi 78! QT oftoneaaran iii 21 
wary liv 7 


| ere eh 1 15 


Adhyaya Sloka 


liv 


SOUT NCHA — iy 
aoatediaraarzar: liv 
BAY SATITT : XXXV 
pOAMSTASA xvi 
POTMHTTT 3 — xviii 


Breathe xix 
pRHSTIST Ixxvii 
aReaTTHTT Ixxvii 
pAAARTATES Ixxv 
rat aria wretit =—lxxiv 


 VTATATRTHY Ivi 
WATT TH — lxxxvi 
porary Iviii 
CRUST AIAS —— ixxxvi 
frat sitar li 
gat CT - xviii 
perrate V 
Sitrerahdteg Ixxxvi 
xacrsatetarat xlix 
yt HEAATVIATT — civ 
ae arate lxix 


16 


Adhyaya Sloka 


= Vili 
sae wears Vv 
Stefere sera: xi 


saya eadtarat xxiii 
safer: arrears : 


: cVi 
saifarerdt xl viii 
Sa faerey: Ixxxi 

ix 
SATOT TATA xlvi 
dq 
AHHH: liv 
TARAG HSM: lxxxi 
rR Xvi 
Sensis 
XXIV 
aat FIT x viii 
acasqate ni 1xxxvi 
acqz: Vill 
azarae Ixxiv 
TATATST: xiii 
aarefrdegiga vi 
TATA xxiv 
MAA AT xxii 
ACATTTAT TT lif 
watanteya XXV 


TTAPAC SANA: Ixxxvii 
araeacerey = lxxxvii 


18: 
10 


17 


Adhyaya Sloka Adhyaya Sloka 

aqaeat Ixxxvii 36 | ATTAUeTHTE li 22 
azatafa i 8 | Atrachrencar iii 7 
arguwararfsrart xv 32| ate: wtetar: «> ii, 23 
aaraaerqa Ixix 4 xxx 13 
Ixi 12) ara: @at liv 109 

ATER Maa: Ixxxvi 9 MASA ATAT Ixvii 6 
ara agitate i 3 | arom viii 36 
ateaagst Ixxviii 6 | ATTAT ST xxiv 18 

aan ferny Ixix 9 | avert Ixix 1 
a faoqasaiga xiii «6 larmeurrett  —xxxiii «3 
ATA THATS: lix 4 | ATTA xi 25 
qeTeeTAAST = xivili 5 | array xxiii 7 
TAIT TENT bxxxvi 76 TUCHTTHTT — xlvi_ 86 
errata: = xxvii 8 | apteeqaten wxii 13 
aeeroritet xxi 2 1 li 14 
aeamistertg a | aretrseat xxvii 3 
crenrafarctiat val 29) areaterraareét = ixvili 97 
ie wae il 2 | tb il Ixxxvi 52 
voi: w Ixxxvi 58 

afeafafintats = xiv 12) spa lv 22 
aeMPATSTANSST xlviii 24 | fafatranzat vi 5 
TRATARTTATS «—xlvii 22! PrererereraEUE liv 50 
Tenchgarren: iti 14 | Rrestserateert Ixxvi 9 
arent area xiii 12 frefteerearat ie. 
vem: BY xlviii 37 fret te lnviii 44 
een; TEA ccd’ 5 fre tear: Ixvii 75 
__ Weta ofa liv 25 | fteur: sete: xviii 113 
area xxiv. 34 | dtectawerfafas: = xix 2 
AMIS ST xxiv... 9 chiar arachacorky xxi 24 
rege Ixxxvi. 4 GAAAHTANTHA «xiv | 15 

ATTRA: liij 5g | qeareftoreeit xxxix 5 


Adhyaya Sloka 


auTvgqaneacsn ast x 


co oe 
STATA: xviii 
aaticartiar: xxv 
adlarene Civ 
& TAMATTAT 


ast 7 Sa xxv 
a cTHatsgge —xxxiv 
act frost Ixxxi 
ANATARIVTRT: «ii 
at TTT Ixvi 
&: Gaga: ataeg ii 
ata Bra liv 


ara gaarre xix 
atrerarnfarisges xlviii 
ARRAS Cll 


afearraarres xiii 
AAA SHAS iv 
watt are xlvi 
sary sty aia: XXVi 
TETAT UT: xliv 
Praaqtaanesa —— xxxii 


lini 
Civ 


18 


3 | fafaeerettesrat  xiviii 


Ixviii 
41 | Frearerarty viii 
10 | froyercritt XCViil 


2 cI R BYU Ixxvii 
8 | TIE BRANT: Ixix 
7 ig : xxvii 
2 | PATS TOTAATTT XV 
“ | eae ZI (iiii 
4 q 


113 | ferorett vi 


XVil 


70 | efezorqrsarerera: iv 


4 | aferorapagqent — ixxviii 
8 | afarorqpaares Ixv 
3 | aherorazsrerdter liii 
58 | xferorfaed XCV 
12 | afarnferraareat — iv 
18 | xfezert xivii 
29 | zuSqutquerey liii 
19 | querafrerdt aq xxiii 
29 | qudlaaraeett viii 
14 TOA TTT iii 


3 | Tease xlviii 
‘22 “a 


Adhyaya Sloka 


47 


L9 


Adhyaya Sloka Adhyaya Sloka 
aftrazansit xxx 19) fPaITETaTTE = ixxxvi 48 
SeaAKROAA xciv 9 fefaatte xlvii 11 
qarerqerehs = ixxix 20 | fefageynei xiii 1 
arrears xciv 1 | Feeroreet xlvi 
ze xxvi 8 — a xlvi 6 
qraeatarareaear gS | Frere aarmeert = xlvi. (90 
THT SHA xxiv 12 | Preaeafter xlvii 1 
queaeratear ixxxi 23) Prettaraaew: — ixxxviii 


9 
TITTARTAy : 50 , Feftrafirttecert xiv 22 
TOTTATHTT - feRtaraat paige ix 1 
TUATARAAT xi 2 . Frreancarat aah: litt 107 


Tag Ixxxvi 16: | Pearygareerarcrear xlvi 93 


razed civ 17) a: dear Ixxxiv 2 
TACATATAT Ivii 30, ‘ahaniieged: xxiv 8 
oes | lxi 5 eas xxx 5 

7 xxv a | dates Rrarrresr xxx 30 

Ixx | 7 | Srertterrett xcv 18 

at: welt 0 , tire: TITS: xxxii 15 


ftaea xevi | | eager Ixix 21 


erecectraraee iii 36 i cvi 4 

rz | ii 33/3 grease: ixxxviii 7 
feracyhaeacr vi 6, giacfafartea Ixxxviii 28 
fivecemmififies xi 6 | ahlerrnaer xivi 38 
feraquraftert = xliii - quater civ 19 
Teara eat ixxxyii 40| FEAT sixxvili_ 16 
aay: . ti 37 | Berorgratarter ii: 21 
Revere: xxxvii «3 FETA eTseaT xxiv. 28 


Adhyaya Sloka | 


ill 


Tarra 1q equsy XCV 
PECTIC TY xlvi 
SATII xl viii 
TITANS yi 
Sag Talis 
Raaray: ixxii 
CUC EN Lili 
arrenhraaratt Civ 


Satara i 


Saaarat WHEAT xly; 

XXI 
gfmeatfeaew, xviii 
xtaetaeerur XVI 


Reragqurang ra Ixxvii 


zytor Tarrant XXi 
Ixxxvi 
SUTTMGTES —ixxxi 
lviii 


20 


Adhyaya Sloka 

3 | RTT RRTT AT vi 2 
58 | areata viii 18 
13 | Beearaeray xliv 2 
36 od atarreniqi=t liii 78° 
i XXxiii 22 
31 liv 120: 
35 Pb lvi 16 
80 | erresrare: i 33 
23 ERR RTT: xxix 8 
31 | aR gaarqhrte lvi 27 
‘ wreatagert = xvii 1 
fawardtaaratte y 3 
| Wrerarenr xii 18 
® Pirate Ixvili 11 
org: rae xcv 6 
- : etter Ixxvii 23- 
9 | 9 aI Ixxxi 1 
|” x ta Ix 9 
| 9? Ixxx 2 
5 ear xliii 36 
102 | erent xevi | 2 
1 | ERT xevi 14 
‘4 »FSTSTNATATTSY vii 10. 
gs | Foeertsheeatan vii 11 
| Burrtraat xvii 47 
ce qTUaRe vii 35 
25 ar 
33 | eS | 
14 aqgq: Xxxiv 3 
18 | WTO . Giv'» 24 
49 | serena tent RE aD 


Adhyaya Sloka 


satita ii 
erfereatt erat Ixviii 
aftatswam Ixviii 
qTPVTt Xivii 


qfeacqaiaazvanat sv 
qTaTeaay 


Cill 
ITT TNT liv 
ATATAAT xviii 
aTaHatat Ixxvi 
TFAM YET lili 
Meares li 
UFMELITARHS — xvi 
MTorag aU ear evi 


RTH MTGIES xxxiii 
dacarafratat bxxxvii 


qarsare fears: xlviii 
TA SSATA XXXil 
TMS Ix 
qaATaA SATA: viii 
qargararkenras xliii 
qaisatta xlvi 
wanachaaa aha xi 
STATTRTTMAT — xiii 
LAK) lv 
sTAAFTITNT «=—xxxiii 
SATHATA xiii 
vaarahraazet iii 
wasart ft fe XXXIli 
casatarrsdra: lili 


CINE 7 xi 
6 a 


al 


35 | ATTITHSUAATT 
32 | arsferaret 

10 | waa 

50 | tHataraitsi 
4| atirara 


XXX 
xix 


XXXiii 
XCVILi 
X1V 
xvii 
Xl viii 
Vili 


Ixxvil 


xliv 
IXxviii 
Ixxxvi 
ii 

ii 

Ixxxvi 
liv 
Ixxvili 
Ixxvill 
Vili 

lili 

li 

ill 

li 

XXX1 
liv 


1X - 


Adhyaya Sloka 


27 
13 


Adhyaya Sloka 


Xl 


22 


62 
14 
82 
21 


1 
} 
H 


areata 
fhiraz: 
TAT ATEATT 
18 | ATEITRT 

14 | Teserranty 
71 | areaTgestter 


Ixxxvii 


Ixviii 
XXIV 
Xcvi 

xlvi 
xIvi 
XCill 
Iviii 


10 AATSSTANSTs iii 


26 ater 


11 : Prersrerered 
13 faraatacadtaat xxviii 


XVI 

l 

Xl viii 
li 
XXIV 
XCVil 
Ixx 
IXxili 


IV 


xviii 


Adhyaya Sloka 


19 
85 
26 


23 


Adhyaya Sloka Adhyaya Sloka 
frofactia xxvi 13 tare feRrean: xiv 17 
Freres viii 30) THAT Tava xcy 27 
froswaSrMnas xcv 34 ial TH AAT aca 8 
Rreoiremearhret: 91 8 Sarena xe 7 
fer: ear sfreenteare Ixviit 17 srrrared: Ixxxi 22 
frefeaam: ix 41 | arora “a4 
frashkase civ 53 | aretraarhr i a 
AITEAIT xcv 3 STMT ET t: liv 96 
aftasortte: Ixxxv 6 | TMA Hah li 17 
ftasafiaer xlv ll | TA AAT TTR Xxix 3 
ferrets xxxii 21 | q 
fers: liv 46: > | 
secret Inxcix 1) Oe akan 
THITA xiii 20) “AMAT xxxii 30 
Taare xlviii_ 80. ANGE: xlv 10 
OTT Wii 50, "SETAC xy 7 
atercty xlv 14, ATS T TT v 17 
 afagterac: xxx 25 | ATTA Ixxxi 11 
ERE lig | TTT aa 47 
TATUM: Lxxxvi 50 | ann, my 21 
 Taarata liii 141” xxl 31 
TAT xeviii 14 | oT lxviii 77 
CBr : xxvii 9 | »SSASYAATAAA civ 57 
ATEAIMT Ixviii 87 areata Ixxix 39 
*zewT: Ixx 19 »aret Xlix 5 
aahrrregeat xxvii 21 | saTReT viii 27 
Reverdeaftt xliv 25 | , 2qrrtar lxix 31 
“Seaqtere liv 115 | , oyterfa: Ixvii 4 
Sates liv 98 | , ,S:aprekeret xlix 2 
Wat raraereht % 86 | shee Ixxvii 37 
Sratetterrenkt Ixxxvi MAATATT == ixxxvi 11 


Adhyaya Sloka | Adhyaya Sloka 
@ 
Uqee iii 65 | TaTeya xxx 28 
yO: xviii 64 | TTT ETE xxi 22 
yaifgerecacm: = ivi 44 ATTA «—oxxxix 1 
TAME wv 3 er ae 7 
sCAAARTRS 1 20) i eraTte ' 7 ; 
cata. a Ixxxvii 38 | ae is a oie 
CMC CICERGIE xvi 39 | potion : 
Cae tat Ixxxvii 11 | ATCT a 51 
OTE ma 2S iv Uh 
ANANTH — dix o Ixxxvi 49 
aera vi 56 | TRA v 60 
Tatty seg | sareticorrarta lili 16 
99 | Ixxxvi 66: . 

: : | CAG ii 12 
Talc: Ixi 1 . gy evi 
_fergter xvi 19 PESTA a 
»oraaqneayen [Xxx] g | 191 arid ’ 35 
fearfater viii 46 AST liv 5 
»forarramt civ 20] TOTS Trearet ara Ixxx 13 
TTS S TT Ixvitt 79 | a 73 | li 13 
 RaVSat ixvii 21 ! AULIATASATIST Ixii 1 
A CATAVSS xxxiy 12) 0 TTAB «ixii 2 
ATISHAST v 94] 5S TTT Ixxxix 12 
pera Ixvii 14 ! ATSAA a | 
sweat! hit §=52 | ya | Ixx 24 
» PATTER lvii 12 |, .areararterst vii 12 
TAG TEM v 47 : eae Ix 2] 
: vy 90 atgfretteet: =v 59 
? WATT IA xX Vill 1 5 aaa xlvi 4 a Z. ‘ 
AAT TTS vy 52 |, zreeradte | 

” liv 108 
TART : lviii, 28 _ lerreeat xiii. 18 
sSTAAMTATH = ixxxi 13 | ,, eaerferfrer si 


24 


25 


Adhyaya Sloka Adhyaya Sloka 


qatar Ixviii 23°} fcerferory xlvi 66 
OUTTA liv 118 | , cara li 84 
ST ATHAAT Ixxix 25 STII Xxiv 6 
RITA TET xciv 61, ware liv 30 

aR? Ixxxi 17) .etqarater liv 32 
sStTITSSA: = xxix 12 | , eaeraqor Ixix 40 - 
»TSAAT xliv 19 »VTAITATkes Ixxiv 16 
TU SUTATATAT XciX 2. | | .BEATTS liv 3 
MITT TE viii 6 CALA xlviii 38 

; , ome 

CAAA lix 2) wear: xlviii 3 
efererar facta Ixviii 39 | | seyqatteq xxxii 12 
STH AGERT xlvii 18 | oe: xiii 6 
p SUT TT ix 15) afeat xlviii 25 
»aleale: xevii 15 |  ATAANTAT: xv 6 
1, SATT IATA: xv 8) asrarer xliii 11 
adhe i 15! trarsaersat xlvi 29 
treatta xvii 6.) horse fey xciii 8 
-STHT v 73 | orferer: Ixxxviii 23 
sSTRTATT lit 81) ofaasdenr xev 13 
neti ST civ 6) .wachatag xlvi 98 
ASAT xxxvii 2 | aqderne xxvii 1 
ATTAREAT: lxxxvi 8 | Seraferebaat ixxxvi 55 
sSaHay liv 75) | Sfeeper Ixxix 6 
»ertaureat liv 65) | Saray: ix 2 
Gerareat Tey Ixxviii 22) | S@rcenrenrat Ix 10 
TOTS RT xlviii 73) afer evi 2 
IIT TAA xlviii 15] afer xv 28 
, eercUt 1 16 | ,ateerfsr vii 7 
susray xevi 9|,arrtq iii 40 
eRe ev it} ateesireet vii 42 
ATT THT i 36) athrger: xliv 13 


gaergerar 
TOT TTA STA 


TANTAEU 


26 


Adhyaya Sloka Adhyaya Sloka 
© 

ixxvii 22 | THeMthregqerar civ 58 
lix 13 | rePehete xi 5 
y 87 | aITaTeae _— Inxxvili 44 
liv 16 | seater ferret = xviii 68 
vy 34 ferrari Xxxiv 9 
iii 5 plafraaatia iii 34 
ii 51 | errata iv 4 
liv 63 ATTRTTE A xcv 30 
v 831» Wt olxxix «5 
xc 3 tAATAT xliv 5 
xxi 13 sf TTT: Xxxvii 1 
xxiv 23/"% <. : se . 

ARSE: XXX 

liti 44 
WATE 1731 t civ 32 
i 20 “arrett i 2 
ixxxvi 80 ae eH aT liv 28 

Ixxxvi 7 erargetararar ‘ 
oa 15 5 ¢ at liv 66 
ATA civ 39 
wv 8 MAAAALIATALNY  xxxii 28 
xix 18) Severe xii 5 
xv 16) | qcirategerit vi 28k 
xx 7 | , gerard Ixxiv 6 
xvi 24) waaeat Ixxi 1 
xxxiii 13 | , srerrferar lviii 58 
xvii 8| wena Ixxxvii 32 
vii 17 | , wrerfare xev 44 
v 71 | ,,.oeraTE: cv 69 
xxi 19| , faceagqca Ixviii “7 
xxxii 20 | , faateater Ixx 20 

1°) 

xv 26 | , rerarterafe xxviii 23 
Ixxxix 17 ratte: xcv 46 


Adhyaya Sloka 


XCIV 


sCUTAT NY Ixxix 
ALTTS TAT ——xciv 
wv 6 - 


xlvi 
WTHT TAT Vii 
, wrerferkerer vii 
ye? i vii 
RaTatert XXX 


XV 
ks s 
TITTY xi 
S e 
od a CITT: li 
patra liti 
TERY xlvii 
rarerter iii 
CTIA TTC ATT Xi 
wy 
WHATS Kv 
a lercerareter XXX 
, SITIAT xvii 
sSaTrrey lili 


Adhyaya Sloka 
14. TATA Ixix 15 
5 | tert lxix 23 
11 | , Ft lv 1 
52 | ,asuaste xliv 8 
8 ATTA ClV 2 
4 s AUTETSTOT civ 1 
22 | , arererorr xxviii 20 
3| eamgheratea civ 59 
35 1 CETATHY a | xcvi 11 
77 5) ez iv 30 
14 | ,zamTesa Ixxxix 7 
8| 49 xxviii 19 
9 | Tz xlvi 20 
3 | , arewerorite vi 31 
35 | , ager lvii 4 
88 |. gerrat wi 30 
9 | fsraagenr: ci 
37 | tretsearrha xliti 41 
6 | strate xliii 9 
115 | Nersrecar xxxiii 9 
13 | Srarearrat iv 16 
117 | ,ewetaraes: — ixxxvii 41 
32 | ,eRBRATATAT: xviii 10 
1 sGICa xlviii 9 
“e TMA TIT Ix 
119 h 
1 | wftrertsRr Ixxxviii 19 
25 | neBgatarct liv 56 
11 | ReHRawatT xxix 1 
4' qoqhyge xliti 60 


28 


~ Adhyaya Sloka 


16 | qeeareaterné 


HAY. ly 


BC GLE| xxi 
Hear: Ivi 
Gorka xiv 
RSH lxxxviii 

q 


Teast xiv 
Taras Iviii 
TITS c 

ays XXXI11 
aeatent Ixxiv 
TETRITETT ci 
TEVA ci 
TETAS: Ixviii 
qeareddiereat x 
aetremea xii 


10 
21 


Adhyaya Sloka 


e 


7 | merottg teenie | 


11| aargeerterae 


7 


18 
31 


72 
67 


47 


TATALA 

AMTRATSS 

| FAINT TACATT 
TTA 


STRICT: 


salt aanrsat 


| 


t 


| 


h <4 
30 | ER ICI EIR Il 


BG 


$s 


erent 
stearirs 


| 


xlvi 
XVill 
1X 


xi 
lili 
xiii 
xlvi 

Ixxiv 
xivili 
Vv 


xhi 


XCili 
xviii 
liti 
xliv 
XXXIi 
Ixxv 
1X 
XX1 
Ixxi 
Ixvii 
xiv 
Xi viii 
Ixxxix 
ix 

xi 
Civ 


15 


Adhyaya Sloka 


4 | waknee: 


WrHSqitac Ixxxviii 
Satay ° 1V 
»CATHTU xlviii 
RATER — 
* oS re 

WTA Ixxvii 
TANT XXXili 


» TATAT “y 


SCA ED xliii 
TAPAS ist vill 
yaaa XVili 


5 arcfesraey xl 


pTETA xivii 
araeat Xi 
99 CES wa Eul Ixxxvi 
q 
THEAAMTH — lxxxvii 
Tay: }xviii 
Tae xviii 
ta 
liv 
Fifirereation Ixxviii 
eanTat vj 
— - 
Ixxxvi 


“ iin iv 

areas 

VAMFI Ixviii 

WeraTararagg_ai 
8 


Ixxxvili 


lxix 
xxi 


29 


29 


Adhyaya Sloka 


WHETICHT 
sOeTay STE 
a ReT 
tara qat 

UT ALT 

Ha tsrTarOTe tery 


RATT RTA 


lxix 
CVii 
Vv 
Ixviii 
XCVili 
xix 
lvi 


xl viii 
Civ 
Ixx 


XVI 
XXX 
xxi 
Ixvili 
xivi 
]xix 
xi viii 
XXXiV 
Xvil 

XVii 


30 


Adhyaya Sloka Adhyaya Sloka 
ixxxii «5 | Weafesrare: v 89 
Ixviii 78 | HeaNTTeart: Ixvii 1 

qT ASAATATATCT xlvi 3 

WAVTACHNS: —iixix 30 

Ixviii 48 | Wheaea Ixviii 67 
xii 47 | afaeuvaceeae xxiv 14 

iv 26 | Rea: xlvi 24 

xlii 44 | Feeqqa4rey Xxx 7 
lili 123 | werceasara: = ixxxi 34 

Ixxvii 6 | aeatiret xvi 10 
Ixvili 38, Weaeteraeat: = xxxii 6 


Ixviii 13 | PLT RATT xxviii 14 
Ix 7) aRUgaeraray lviii 51 


lxix 37  qweetenrafa liv 62 
xlviii 34 | weesrafare liv 86 
Ixx 2 Tq Ixviii 112 
xvi 16 | aaearaaTrar iii 62 
Ixviii 16 | afaqeq Ixviii 93 
xlvi 27 | wEeTaneatser xlvi 81 
xviii 15 | afetrgrrfar xlv 9 
xlvi 16 | apfteratra: xviii 109 
xvi 7 | a@egeizar xlviii 86 
iv 19 arated Ixxvi 3 


Ixx 5 | qpaftralearmrat: xxi +0 


vy 30| arasraat xxi 20 
Ixix 22 | arfaertt: xxx 14 
v 51 murserhyse civ 3 


31 


Adhyaya Sloka Adhyaya Sloka 
xiv «63 | FAIRS v 3 
Ixvili 26 | FIR xlviii 77 
lv 20 | HST: Ixy 4 
Ixxviii 18 | BPA xliii 10 
xlviii 30 | Berra i 3 
xix 10 | WateahRritra xlvii 12 
xev 23 | HaCaT xciti 14 
xlviii 66 | Beara i 9 
lit 76 | Hare en 4 
xxi 6 | WaTHaT i 34 
xxviii 5 | oar iii 82 
PO COC CEY xciv 8 
Ixix 11) qeAG xlviii 1 
Ixix 33 | FSAAWET ci 5 
Ixix 10 | Fekraae xevili 7 


Ixxxi 9 TOMA xi 59 
Ixxxii 9 | Weaearhresthrer xv 17 
Ixxxi 10 | aarqeetest xiii 11 
Ixxvi 8 ONIC ICE IER xlvi 72 
xvi 57 | araveante xxi 30 

cv 16 araretet Xxx 2 


ly 30 | aafarctrace x 
xlii 4 agTererergert xv 3 


xii «8 | aratteiarnit xxi 9 

Ixxxvi 12 | quTeqaeatax ixvii 3 

Ixxii 2 | WaIgUTaTeT Ixxi 2 
xxi 23 FAST HITT xcv 39 

xxi 16 | qafemefarie xlv 13 
Vv 


Adhyaya Sloka Adhyaya Sloka 


FeTMTS TTT xcviii 10 | @ataftaa: 
ORAS Ixi 10 | waTtaF 


PANT AT lv 2 TATA 


ters liv 22 | warfeerarre 
Taos xvi 2 | watherarstta 
er: fearar: xxii 8 | afeenozenritenr 


Tawreaacrey xxvii 7 | areat 
Heese vi 17 | afefaez 
aqrara xlii 3 | arate 
Ser x 12 | aferaferettrerc 
WAAIT ix 32 | afeeraftreraauit 
Nae xv 15 | afraat 
aterrat xc 12| afeara 
rsoteaty v 33) afrarrat 
a, | 

tacort ii 14 : afeaeret . 

eT aasteraratat 
YT: RBeITTS: Ixv 7) Srergrae Het 


q: Rastsrar Ixxix 12 | qeraRapror 
7: TzHTag: Ixxix 13 | TAA SA 


=e hel Ixxxvi 1 | PTAA TOT: 
ToSTATAT Ixxviii 20 | water 
THT xcix 3 | TaATAtt 
AMO viii 49 | Berea 


lii 3 | werntera 
aafearrenirern liv 91 | waRratrara: 
qed xxvi 4 | walfeeft 


xxii 5 
XXVii 5 
x 19 
xxvii 10 
ix 38 
liv 57 
iv 32 
xxii 3 
xxviii 17 
xvi 41 
liv 59 
liv 29 
v 4 
xcv 27 
liv 70 
liv 6 
xcv 42 
xev 15 
Ixvili = 853 
xlin 49 
xivi 44 
xxvill 18 
liv 33 
xliv 17 
vi il 
v 26 

Xi 
xxv ol 
xlvii 28 
xxi 7 

lix 


Adhyaya Sloka 


AHATT ASA xix 
TaAANAaAagT «=A xiii 
Qeraaaeat xliii 
ol WATATATE ST Ixxii 
aq: eatrqeay Ixxix 
7 AaARANTaT — xix 
: I Ixxv 
aearaana ere 
ii 
afeaaretearry xxix 
afencersrtest liv 
e 
akayaey XX 


xx 
qarehiregarat XX 
TANTRA AT: = xxxviii 
TATTATASAT i 
a > liv 
qerrtsrwtasta peat 
aieaqeater:  xxxiv 
' ~ 
ATA Ta lxx 
arated Ixxvii 
arrofaretsrat xxii 
aratat aeArika sie 


arate F 


arate: Ixxxvii 
USAT ATT civ 
ATT AEATATT x}vi 
arrare faye xlvi 
QTATAT IAT Ixxxviii 


33 


Adhyaya Sloka 

28 | atfrerags Ixxx 16 
2 aradteararta lix 11 
28 | artes xliii 17 
4 | ATTA : xlviii 79 
‘- | ara hark: liv 103 
g | ateatacrerats v 23 
g | areatievaryay li 85 
6 | aiearetet liii 38 
19 | areaaaeTEMe liv 41 
14 | J Ixxxvii 4 
61 | area harearatsyat xxvi 7 
4 | AEASETY ixxxvii 27 
1p | aRRASeTatetare xv 27 
9 QUAL xc ll 
UATATAHEMATAT xi 48 
WAMTAYET Sea xi 52 
; ATAPAIETAT AA xi 7 
60 QWTTAAAATAT ev 13 
ss QeATSATATA eA? ~—oxlvili «2 
: areata Ixxviii 17 
areata xc 30 .«6 
a Hae Ixxvii 36 
THT iv 13 

6) sarefire Ixxviii 23 
14 | ererrereyar xvii 1 
7 |, cere TAT xvii 12 
6 ICI CID ICs | xxxiv 16 
56 | , ,wrrereattenter xcv 56 
1] , acraater Ixxiii 4 
60 |, ACIASareraT xxxiv 20 
12 | Farag ary xvi 83 


Adhyaya Sloka 


yattafea 
ogea WS IP lxi 
TATITETN SY xii 
MTTCATTRT 


XXill 
RoC XXVI 
» SHTAAT Ixxiv 
p TUTTE RT Ixvi 
 ATeAT NT xli 
PU f cit, § Xi 
» MATT ETT xviii 


xhiti 
XXII 


armitage vii 


MT TATATA xxiv 
ay sdtadrearaa XXXI 
AST AIT Ix 
arat feraer Ixi 
a faeenret lvi 
TSAIAL Vv 
aaa iv 
q 
THUG ALAy xlvi 
THAT FT Bw Ixxx 
TH ATHNS 7 lxix 
CH TATA SARI XXXIV 
THANE HT viii 
THT HBT xliii 


THVT: ci 
q 4 . + e C1V 


Ixviti 


34 


27 | centers = xlvi 
9| taktarrararaaer — xiii 
3 CHHTATATALTY Ixxxvii 
3 | Taare ie 
3 | cade XXXVili 
5 | TaraASSaT xlifi 
3 | CSSA HUT HIS XCV 
1 | aca Ixix 

53 | Cemaaeteeay Ixxx 
7 | certfafyeatza xxiv 

34 | teattreaarerey —xlviii 
5 | Cerrar Ixxx 


11 ; Ceataseaie lil 


12 | chraeraea: xxii 
19 | cfasreraraft XViii 
ll | charsreraa XVil 
14 | craaateaa XVil 


XVil 
11 | cana civ 
24 | tfraeorfasate xliv 
23 | CTATHATCY Ixxxvi 
51 | Urstraarey Ke 
42 TIMITHCUT ili 
1 | cratferaqrat xliii 
47 TIPTARIT Ixxviil 


Adhyaya Sloka 


14 


35 


Adhyaya Sloka Adhyaya Sloka 
xii 9 | tfeftarnearas xlvii 14 
xli 11 | ofReat xv 2 
xiii 13 | OfFopactacd c 7 
xlvi 26 | Aeeatsaei viii 19 
xlvi 18 | Ufeaseertsaat liv 15 
xlvii 83 | UAVATA SAT Ixxxvi 26 
: 7 | liv 68 
citi. 10 | — mw 
civ 14 | ronan a 
cise 51 @ 
Ixxi 11 | SANTA ALT xliv 15 
xliii 25 | , wr seraeey xcvi 8 
Ixxxvi 41 | .q@enfsaargen: xcviii 9 
Ixviii 73) , ext: faréter Ixxxv 4 
ii 38 | sere: xliii 3 
xxl 26 | | ere irealt 1 18 
vO) srt viii 21 
va 1) aaa Ixi 16 
Ixxxix 4 sa ¢ : 
ae Poe a! 
xxiv 21) CRATER = 
: MAATISEA —xlviii 19 
xxxii 11 se 
eit co] . ae " 
x 18)” we 7 
Hi 63 | RET: a 
we on fegaraterarat lix 7 
ixxvii 29 | PRSTTATR =— viii 53 
ixyiii 59 SE serararet Ixviii 7 
ixvii 5 | feeder lxxi 10 
xxiv 30!) Qategtdteg = xvi 79 


ararharenttgres Ixxxviii 


XC 
airerBeqag: xvi 
BIWTAAVSTT Ixxvii 
q 
TTATANIATAT ci 
TIAA xviii 
aRRTSTETTAT xi 
THT AHTAAA 
TRTATAT OTA liti 
TATHAATT: xvii 
TASTHAAATAT — xviii 
CcVii 
aaa Paisyz iy Ixxx 
aararrarat = lxviii 
aarfradtery so xlvi 
aaerdte Ixxx 
TsHVd Ixxxviii 
TIGA HATTA . lv 
qeaenty ! 
qeateater xlvi 
araraitqaiz titi 
arerarisrara sft ii 
TATA ASS lvi 
afgaaareram: — xlviii 
SYAAAITAA Xci 
aateaat Xcvl 


36 
Adhyaya Sloka 


Adhyaya Sloka 


2 TSN XV 
2 atraraara Xiv 
1g | Tanta: xviii 
, TTT RTE Ixxxii 
aaTas xxvii 
$ XXXIV 
qUrsrarecraiat hey: lxv 
14 TIALS AST XXViil 
54) qatateate ii 
12 | aryftrenrPeran vii 
10 SE} ; XXVill 
103 | TUNISIA 1xxxi 
2. | Tearearen Ixviii 
gg | TETRA liv 
17 | Teme iv 
45 TAHA XCiV 
84 recite Ferret liv 
acdtarat liv 
4 | qaftaraitea: liv 
11) aehetaRrarat liv 
11 | agttatareret XXVili 
24 AS laanyen 1xxxv 
- AGAMA: XV 
ATACTH NG Ixxi 
73 | geantagauiat xii 
7 qarcaercta xX 
8 qatearaac xix 
49 | aperchag Ixvxvii 
3 | aracaeratet —lxviii 
_17 3 


. lv 


22 
32 
27 


Adhyaya Sloka Adhyaya Sloka 

ardaaaate Ixviii 49 | @tewureat xcv 14 
araeteronniareat Ixxxvi 51 | aveat xlvii 25 
araRrety Ixxxix 11|ferrareageget: x 49 
ATTA xcv 28 | fata Xxiv 14 
QTTASATAAET: «= ixxxvi 72 He xlvi 36 
QAR AAT vy 85 | farreratar Xxiv 22 
amaraaata Ixi 13 | fasrnchran: civ 23 
araraat Ixxxiv 1 | sii Ixy 5 
MAMTA: lvii 39 | AACA Vili 16 
iv 45 ! faacerane Ix 14 

arrarfarcarat xcv 26 | Rrercreram vii 2 
MITT xcii 19 | Fatseaterra Xxx 9 
Qasr Ixxx 10 | % Ixviii 76 
are —ixxxvii 13 | aateeereye: iit 53 
anTea TH Ixxxvii 12 | Prarfercfrator 1 19 


ATTEN RTT Xxxii 10 : Fergie: Ixxvi 5 
aay xlvi 64, fafeaaza xxxy 4 
areata: xxiv 24 | fewer: Ixxxvi 70 
agente: = ixxxvii 37 | frearaerste xxxiii 5 
arergerawat: = _xxxii 29 | fafa 


xl 12 
QTeTATAT Ixxx 9 | fafa Ixxxviii 42 
ATecrsarey Xxxii 22 | faferferqeer: xev 59 
arenraaqararr v.22 | faatrrarar XXvili 7 


ASIAN TAT ixxxvii 10 | Farer rataey xxix =9 
aratrreaeat = xix 11 | fraeftrawatt: vi 13 


ae erararteT Ixxv 6 | fageraty , civ 64 
| arerzeritr iti 70 | Faget: xxi 17 
arercrity lv 19 | favertfrafae xxxiv 19 
areqarraara: lii 1 | faxwarce Ixxi 14 


38 


Adhyaya Sloka Adhyaya Sloka 
farceqereitt liii 100 | qetsrarra lix 12 
fatterntar ioc Mm 


Frgenterate Wii 47)" ole 
es MAMA ST Ixxxvi 73 
Taariearst Ixvill 107 | _ SATTaTRTETR 


Ixxxix 19 

arene xi 23) 7_. ares 
TAAL lvi 23 

fanaa vy 57 , 
; ¥ | ys AIaTATAT SIT xxvi 14 

faatracai xvii 2) = 

bom _ | oerreate v 49 
Perea aa xxvii : sgftattr xxiv 11 


racagqeh xxviii 4| 7 
RrafaereataHt: se 29 | PRURTE | Ixix 38 


1 11 
fax 33 3 x 
STU RTATH xv 19 | ,, TRATED xiii 9 
favrerratreant ixxxvi 32/” i 
Recreenit lei | 3 
a | TAN Ixi 5 
TrTATSTAT AN xviii 25 


a TETTAT xlviii 76 
farafararte: Ixviii 40 | ge f a 6 
ee eae if 

avatars xvii 30) fear ii 
mice vili 25 

Fereoy artsy viii 23) | feesrtur iv 11 

faortarlraars - Ix 19) Se fererrit 

frarsvafaeeren Ixxxvi 54 2 


aorraetasrer 
farastara: Ixxxvi 56 AohyasTtTTAy li 40 


ferercartioige xlix 1] Qeeqrey xlvi 12 
Faencarearia: lii 22 | Ferd v 24 
fereareret lvi 12 | tearagara Ixxxvii 15 
ferecttorenct Ixvit 7 darashine Ixxxy 3 


39 


Adhyaya Sloka 


agtqangza 
TRIAS 


liv 
XIV 
xh 
li 
Vill 
XCV 


Vill 
IXXXV1 
xIvi 
XIX 
IXXXVI 
Ixxxvi 
vi 
XXX 
Li 


Vil 
IXXXVI 
Xill 

litt 
xi 
XXVII 
xlvi 
xvi 
X¢eviil 
Ix 


. , 
Ixxxi 


Ixxxvi 


107 


14] , aferrat 


+ ogee 
17 cfearreitert 


5 | , Salata 
6 | , <aurautt 
29 | ,,eaurareay 
23 | Srrntrenorigter 


xxvii 
XX1 
1X 


Civ 
lviti 
CV 
XCV 
ill 
ili 


Ixxviil 


Civ 
IXxXViil 
xIvil 
Ixxxl 
lit 

XXX 
IXXXVii 


Ixviii 


Ixxvili | 


liti 


liv 


Adhyaya Sloka 


8 
29 
34 


102 
105 


Adhyaya Sloka 


SITFATITEATAT li 


RAN viii 
ANTFST a xlvi 
ytarqdeu: xii 
raat XXIV 
wragqaera Ixxxvi 
seatalaad: Ci 


5 FaATETAUTT xc 


XCV 
Pater Ixxxvii 
 frTTE xliv 
1 FATTER: \viii 
i S| Ixviii 
sOUMATT liii 


CUTAN xix 
sOMHOAAUIGTRT xxix 


OATH Ixxxv 
CANTATA: cvii 
fakenresaa XXXiV 
LAT xeviii 
aR XCV 
herrea liii 


eararaT ix 
Ceateeraranr lii 
CRETE 
pUSBS li 
seaiRragtt 


yr Aa TAIT 


40 


| Adhyaya Sloka 

21 | Sitcrarerratt lv 14 
33 l 99 ¢ xIlvi 92 
29 | sATOTAT ATT: xevii 4 
21 pareorkanapertat xlvi 39 
12 | yarnate xxviii ‘11 
71 yngaddedy xi ll 
5) waaay Ixxxiii 1 
14 | , Parfitt Ixviii 71 
20 | .rerertaas v 61 
29 | salads civ 33 
21 : »HITTITA Xvii 21 
40 | .aaqewaret xi 28 
115 | ,, evar viii 42 
- 20) .eeeraarizer: xxix 26 
16 | PATA: xiv 7 
2 | CHT XXX 11 
7 ETCH XXxlii 14 
1 , PTAA iv 31 
-6 pfengcaract: lv 8. 
1] RaeMRT —xevili 17 
4 | ee : vili 5 
43 |  MelgGaTe Ixxix 16 
44 | ZT XCV 61 
4 | aaea Stata xl 865 
11 !  mafacrediat xlvi 28 
42 | qateanre Ixviii 3; 
30 | syyathaegtiatter iv 17 
37 | Sreareateetr: Iwi 15 
22 | aeteqeraatt = xivili 33 
14 Tearenieh xvi 25 


41 


Adhyaya Sloka Adhyaya Sloka 
aTlorerarayzt xvi 9 | Weeteer Ixxxviii 32 
sTrorrenazy liv 23 atyarsret XXxiii 25 
strat seraraay li 45 | WSR xxix 10 
CAAA AAT j 64 / Seeateaoreat ixxxvi 45 
RATAHRTT lIxi 8 | ASISTA STH : xhiti §=15 
TATA Ixxxviii 1 : EMT TM BATT xxiv 9 
RATHTEUTT xi 24: ATMAG ETA AH lv 29 
SATA SHAAA iii 29 | CATT AT xlvili 4 
earatadtel xi 4) ASAT li 33 
EMTS STI  xxxiii 16 | sahycieararaag = xlvi. 71 
SAAUTETET: xvi 68 | SARE TTET xe 1 
STqOPTSCRTTT . 4 cos lit 93 
rirergeren a ST UT TT liii 95 
/ TUATATTSA ~~ 2 xvi 68 
aca ey saa AT gUT Ixxviii 15 
ort earererh vi 7 | ere Ferarer amend 
UPAATAATA T ixviii 116 | ee ay 2 
sraaat vii 12 TAT liv 13 
sfrateda txxxviii 27 | Tee a 
sftercara ae ig ee ay 10 
sttafratarer xliii 4° saree TAT = 
sitar Tat “2 SSATSTTATTAST XXXviii = 3 
stra ] Se XC1V 2 | sara a 2 
stlarerae Wi 31 q 
straeradarnars ] 2 : RS total xii 10 
sttaaadaasea olxxix 21! Sarat iv 7 
feasts lxxvii 16 | yee lxvi 5 
yeh xiv, 4 ofgater: xxxii 23 
aeagtTET viii 35 | »fgafeere liti §=7 
raTaa li 36 | ,.Agrerhggettart iii 5 


42 


Adhyaya Sloka | | Adhyaya Sloka 
xevii 9-2 | BTA liii 13 


Ixxxii 7 ,reatarat Ixxxvi 69 
a — sli 29 


Ixxvii 21 


Ixix 7 | green xxiv 18. 
vy 19] PETTITT xlvi 75 

ii 6) PeaTea Shy xlvi 67 

ie 20 | STSTATETT liv 83 
Cill 6 |  Torarrager liv 17 
xii 5 | ,arTaat: xxii 6 
den Bi ,alereaat Ixix 12 
io Woe my 30 
Invi 28 rated a Ixviii 96 
Ixxvii 20 AEA xi 34 
wait 26 | TTR = 
xliti 40 sem: i 38 
paadds xlviii 63 

aero Ixxxvi 3 

xxxiv 5 | ,,atearqy Ixxvii 31 
liv 74|,, aTeraere xevii 16 


xliii 7 : ,AAAT liii 28 
liv 27 | ,Wayacor xxv 4 


xi 44 ,,Waaretetara: = =—sixviii 29 


xev 16 | rar karter iv 11 
xlviii 36 | ,ARTH XXvili 21 
Ixix 6| ,.araetaror xciii 12 
vii 10} ,.gatseer: xii 2 


liii 89 STRATA ii «18 
iii «6 |, FUTATeATTAT liii 57 


Adhyaya Sloka 
lxix 32 | WaRARIRs 
Xxxiv 1 | fear 
vii 24 | faretea: 
iv 18 | .fetereneagva: 
xxxili 12 TaTATA RT 
xxiv 7 | , serrqerery 
lvi 4 | , caraqeqred 
xlvili 62], saree: 
xlvi 89  STRUTATS 
Wii 6 | Parerrest 
Ixxvii 28 | , ,farkerata 
xliv 4 : TATE 
xlvi 30° PaIaaT 
liv 38 | wimeaeeat 
Nix i aay 
xxxvi 3. other: 
Ixxx 14)  saeeaur 
se 5) erate 
Ixxix 17 |  TATR 
Ixxix 1 ; AIBRTTATT 
xlviii 60 | pas 
Ixxxvi 65 | TIAA 
slix 41  ANTABTTA 
liv 31 pareratara 
Ixxv 9 jos a 
xii 12 | », Cae 
iv 2| .aatereg 
xlvi 51 | »ferarttoorr 
xlvi 50 | ,SrtfrermaTEaT 
vi 3' Ragga 


43 


Adhyaya Sloka 
xliv 27 
xlii 12 
xln 14 
Xxii 4 

v 44 

v 43 

li 41 
xcv 10 
liv 104 
xlviii 61 
xxiv 19 
xlvi 37 
xev 32 
xlviii 40 
xiv 4 
Ixix 39 
Ixxvi 11 
x 17 
Ixvin 103 
xlvin = 31 
Ix 22 
ii 2 
lv 9 
lit 21 
Ixxxviii 37 
liv 99 
x 7 
xevili 16 
Ixi 2 
Ixxix = 7 


THEVA AAA 


 ATATAT 
stag: 


Adhyaya Sloka | 
xev 41 | OtaTeargg 
xxi 8 | ,, there 
Ixi 17) ,zaferaa 
li 1, ,.~hegaae 
litt 96 CMF TATS 
xliii 30, ,,taane 
Ixxx 12 | CATT 
xxx 24 | »TAISMT [ 
xvi 8 | ,.trecarfy 
tii 39 | »,f&terat 
xvi 21 |, terra 
Ixviii 18 | ,,. Fear aeaT 
Ixxxi 2: Caterer 
lvi 28: BRteRare 
v 39 | eA 
xlii 6 Heated 
ci 3 ESTA: 
Xci ATTA 
litt 66 | tT 
civ 43 AHIMA 
li 74. TIARAS 
1 a7 reread 
 */attenrent 
xlvi 73 
Ix 15 APART 
ae aeZT Hee 
Ixvili 27 wa 
see sla 
: é | arrasarher 
Ixix 27 | Ric | 
civ 62 Sega 
xxi 16 | aaa 
iii 27  Sareferadiat 


44 


Adhyaya Sloka 
lix 5 

XXiv 2 
XXxiii 29 
Ixxxvi 75 

xvi 28. 

lix 9 

Ixxxi 31 

liv 73 


XIviii 55. 
, IXxix . 29 


xcv 33 
li = 2 
Ixxi 5 
liv 88. 
Xxvil 4 
Ixxix 34 
litt 110 
lin 108. 
civ 4 
civ 41 
civ 54 
Xxxv 1 
liv 106. 
v 10 
xlvi 46 
cli = 3 
Ixxxix 2 
Ixxxix 3: 
xi 42 
xxxiv 10 
iii. 17 


45 


Adhyaya Sloka Adhyaya Sloka 
aaraata xii 1 | eae afer a 8 
aad vy o7 | Ratoriggorrer Ixxviii 13 
ATATAT xxiv 7 | sOrTFerReTT Ixxxvi 79 


Ixxxti 1 
Ixxx 5 
aL | civ 22 


MITT lviii 49 Ixxiv 17 
FITTS xvii 26 | OTT ysis 23 
»FASTESAT vill 4 ! » COTTAM XCiv 4 
‘i ye T xv 30! TEU v 31 
FART xi 17) sea Ixxxvi 38 
target ix 26 | Wear xcv 58 
PAA TAA: ix 43 | SarrHer civ 31 
Corea xvii 14. oT RRC civ 26 
ICH cit 7) TT li 2 
UTETT v 68 se eaTE ciii 8 
sUSHUPSay civ 55. OUTTA xlvi 59 
fereraaer civ 60 pTHTaRTES Ix 18 
CHT ARTE xiii 45 feaeaten xevi 4 
PaTEqa li 111, Se aera lxi 7 
ararcratat xev 45. sathesrz Ixviii 99 
seeaayt xciii 3 | OTT Ixviii 37 
cara xciv 12. sebyweraus: xlv 2 
wateret Fir fey xxviii 12 | STAT Ix ‘14 
»TETNTT 1 13 | Feareereart liv 92 
MATTSTTAy: Ixy 3 : TET Ixviii 98 
PARTS Hii 29 | st erlacsreey Ixviii 90 
staat lili 30 Teaser Ixxxvii 2 
sa Ixx 21 PAETATTST > Lxxxii 3 
Taek Xs oI xevii 6 TET: xlvii 17 
Sarasa TA at 2 | TeITfrrat Ixviii 43 


Adhyaya Sloka 


feararfear Ixviii 91 | <arenrerabrat 
TALMATARAT xi 18 | Meqqy: 
 SAUISETATAT liv 49 | Stetarerer 
TOT: liv 100 7 
fearerteratst Ixx 1 - 
Teeter xi 38) R 
BACIFTSEANA = xviii 101  teraicesamtg 
eeninast = ixxviii_ «3 | FATT RPh 
RTT E xivi 48 | SaSlerry 
eaeraarad Ixxii 2 | oS 
WHat Ixxvii 24 | *rdHTSSTYL 
STVWTIAZ xxiv 29 PER TTR 
eysar aredanry li 11 | oP aTeHRTATA 
STENT Ixxviii 8 | Paley 
Reargatieorary a i 
enact Ixiv 1) THATEAT 
phase: 1g | sReorrarreses 


wHeaverTaat ci. 


WUT xii 


ATT OT TTT Xlvi 
ATM PTITT Ixxvil 
BATARTST Ixxxvili 
waren Ixxxvi 
»pwtTANTg Ixxx 
eta xl vii 
wena: XXxi 
CTT FALE Ixvii 
STATTTM ST XXVi 
ATT | XV 
artherarrer XXV 


46 


lvi 
xliv 
Vv 
Ixviil 
XXX 
XXX11 
Xl 

Xi 
IXXXVi1I 
xliit 
Ixvill 
V 
Ixxvii 
Ixxvi 
Ixxxvi 
lxix 
Ixviil 
liv 
XCVili 
litt 
XXiil 
Ixviii 


Adhyaya Sloka 
ix 16 

cili = 4 

xliii 32 

lviii 4 


§ 4 


vY A 4 A A wh A 


Slokas 


Adhyaya Sloka | Adhyaya Sloka 

xv ll searahria Ixxxvili 36 
x 9) feaagad Ixviil 28 
liv 123 | Sretieacer vii 20 

xeviii 15 | aahritaeg xiv 149 
xix 3/| @uarrete viii 39 
xvi 23/8weadiefarae =o xlv 6 

Ixxxvii 42 | Sareea Xxvi 9 

7 ss ° 

xi 10: 8ttyat xevili 11 

Ixxxvii 15 gledteredtat xviii 8 
xix 12 stdda:waw: xi «88 
xlvi 94 Beaatterter: Ixx 18 
XXvI 10' eteaaee xxi 14 
v 25) 
| Slokas | Slokas | Slokas 

a: 3 | a 

Ti aie 
| 

® 210 | @ 
| 

q | 14 | @ 

7 175 | a 

> | 7  Y 

| 62 T 

S 16 se | 

WT 54 a 136 


47 


Total 2784 


Adh 


oOo CO NF OO OO eF | NHN 


22 


Slokas 


a 


Yo WwW WO WoO WO W WO Ww WH H bv 
oo So | OE ns ©. \~ 2 | Sn > So ME @ 6) 


RIAN RON ensreenen Ecsta * pantera Ph A Or YR re ae a NE Pn = pw hs gp PP 


Slokas 


10 
36 
6 
15 
9 
24 


48 


Adh! Slokas 


oO 
1S i 


66 


10 
25 
25 
31 

| Sl 
8 


16 
99 
28 
87 

8 
26 
44 


14 | 
22 
19 

2 

3 

3 
11 


5 | 


‘ 


j 
? 


jAdb co Adh Slokas) 
67 | 10 || 89 | 20 
68 116 || 90 | 45 
69 | 40 || 91 
| 
70 | 26 |i 92 3 
71} 14 193} 45 
72! 6 oa] 14 
73 | 6 95 | 62 
74 20 , 96 | 17 
75° 10 |1 97 | 17 
76 12 98 | 17 
77 37 |l99| 3 
78 | 26 |100| 8 
79 | 39 101 14 
80 | 18 |10o2| 7 
81 | 46 1103 | 13 
82; 11 |1104 64 
83; 1 11051 16 
84; 2 1106] 6 
85. 9 1107] 14 
86 | 80 | —— 
%, = aon 
88, 47 


Je ales Tet. 


aaah iaia: 


ayaea xvii 
AMAIA v 
TET xii 
ATT ATT il 
AIS Ixxvii 17, 
atte vy 19; vii 
XXXIV 

airarets XV 
age liv 
WF Vv 
arg ferferare 
AFIT Ixxxvi 
ateca ii (18); xiii 
aRtyaT liv 
HAST XXXil 
AT ix 1, xvii 
AAT xiv 5; liv 
[xxvii 

ater \viii 
werasat liv 
area 1xxxv 
wlaramr vii 
athe ii (18); xiii 
xiv 4, xivi 

alate ai 
STF T XXXV 


bexxvi 

Pa oho ClV 
1 alferes liii 

(18) | AT TAT viii 
23 XIV 
ATTAT iv 6, vil 

2 ix 32; x 12; xv 

ci 

50 | aeakter liii 
72 APART Xiv 
9 SeaaTTUT V 

12) TTT XIV 
5 | AITaFA civ 

109 | ATaca litt 
4 ATs vy 43, xvi 

4 AQaca XXV 

5() AMAT — liv 115, Ixxxv 
32 ahyae XIV, 
32 TAT xiv 12, 
50 | TATATRaT XC1X 
5| SANT xxviii 18, xxx 

15 xlvii 
5 | Ate Ixxix 

1 | Aeqta¢d XiV 

45 | aay xiv 7, 
Z| AIT ii (4), 


TIT T ST Vv 
| XIV 
ahtag Xiv 
sits liv 
WeTeaG xi 
wreeata xiii 
ah IXxxXv 
art 1xxx1 
ATT iv 25; liv 12; 
Ixxxv 

ATTA XIV 
ay Ixxx1 
Taz v 68; xvi 
TTA lit 
SINT Xvi 
araeat v 64; xiv 
MIM Vv 
orarta XXXII 
Ta liv 
SAAS, v 39; xiv 
XVI 

TIA TH liv 
FATS vi 


SAH liv 105, Ixxxv 
BITC xiv 3, lix 


Ixxxv 
HITCH, Ixxxvi 
PITA aT xiv 


atsadt vi 2; vii 6; 
ix 35; x 3; xv 26; cl 
orfoerstt Vili 
TORTT i 
STH - lvi 


18 | Tater xxix 
17 | aa xi 
2, | arfereperes vi 
105 | AE liii 
24 | orecfiri ae 
6 | atfeerkg xi 
3 | ate | Lili 
17 | aegere viii 
105; | werers ‘i 
6) ammer xvi 7, xvii 
25 | ara er XIV 
17 | anena : 
31) see =—s-xxi 32, i 
46 amNTA xiv 
38 | & vy 80, xiv 17, 
33 | Ales xiv 8 xvi 
43 | aT liii 
1 | ATAaTaes . liv 
119 | arate v 


27; | ATITUT Vv 
11; srret vii 3, 9; ix 23 x 
43; xv 4 xxi 29; cl 


2 | arat civ 2, 54, 
7 | sreatsra iV 
5 aad Xi 
4 MITTS Xiv 
33) arateet xlviii 


6| apxat vii 9, ix 2, x 


10;| xiv 10, xv 7, xxi29, ci 5. 


1 | AIS 1V 
23 | ATaT ii’ (15); ixxix 


14 | cazret xvi 


wingam v 75; ix 17; xi 


44 


a7. 


=) 
1 
4 
58 


CaTacaT 
CIcCaAT Vili 
ZF v 19, viii 23, xxxiv 
litt 43, 47, lviii 42, Ixxx 


Vill 


Ixxxvi 
CFTaAe liv 
TQ aH Civ 
rt civ 
gratia viii 
reradt XVI 
saratte; Ixxxvi 
1 xxix 
sarTeratit xeviii 
FETT XiV 


ne iV 35; XIV 6; XVi 
sy XIV 
UAC TIST XVi 


5 TCH aya vi 6, 
vii 5, 10; ix 2; x & xv 
Cl 


vi 11; vii 5; 


UUATST 


Ix 2; 35; x 17; xv 24: xxi 


Cl 
TIAN vi 6, 11: vii 23 
ix 3,33; x 15; xv 19; xxi 


cl 
OTe xlvi 
SPIT v 40; xiv 4; xvi 

lv 
ol civ 
ee X1V 
eat xiii 
posttir civ, 49, 


CIV 
24 aeatferr Xiv 
2:| ered xiii 
4) ohearcag xliii 8, 
] TTS XIV 
69 »WTIAT CiV 
34 | Sa iv 28; xi 61; xxx 
18 | Seq xvii 
23 | area ; 


27 athaz iV 


32) afte liv 100; xxvii 
27 | pedaes xiy 
8 | HAAS Civ 

2 ma xlviii 

1 arat Vii 

7 | Xe | li (4); 

10 | ,. xiv 15; Ixxxvi 1, 
11 sXe XiV 
10; TTT xlvi 
a | CT xl viii 

a | RTE xiv 
em | CHT viii 
ui | Decay Ixxxvi 
ix 1; xxx 8, 16; xlvi 

" | xlvii 4, 
1 AasserVIs civ 

3: i 7 Xi 
10 | Har liv 
48 | FR xxvii 
3 | RHE XiV 

47 | BET Xiv 
50 | SFT: Xl 


RTS xiv 
Rosy Vv 
RGTC XiV 
FSR Ixxvii 7, 
HISHETS XIV 
HISHUTHT 
RISA T XIV 
HIT liv 38, 78; Ixxxv 
HATA Xi 
SNStd xi 
ats Ixxxvi 
amaieeey lv 
BAe, i 7, xiv 
SIs xiv 4, ixxxvi 
RTFT Xl 
Reg liv 
ACW liv 33; Ixxxy 
ACT Xcix 
ROTA Y i 
HAT IXxxv 
maT liv 67, 
HAT Ixxvii 
SATTAT XIV 
Ua c 
LS XIV 
MLUTATT liv 
RAL Ixxvii 13, 
RIT xiv 5; xvi 
HfeF v 35; ix 26; xiv 8; 
xvi 1, 3; Ixxx 
aporret Ixxix 
BRIT = ov 3; xxi 2; xxiv 
xiviii 


liv 


52 


16 | BVRTETAT liv 
40 | Tf liti 
27 | wat KiV 
30 | carat xlviii 
10 »feagye Xvi 
57 | \Weard ix 
26 | 301TH v 35; xiv17; xvi 
5 | AT XIV 

18 | , tory Ixxxi 
31 390 Xi 
22 } 9300 xiv 19; Ixxix 
22 | , wate xiv 
17 | ,wyer ii 
1) wae i 

a] Tiler X1V 
21) ae xvi 
4) ae v 64; xiv 

3 9 Ixxxv 

_ PATT XIV 
- aT v 72; x 4; xiv 
thease c 
i RIT v 80; xiv 18, 30; xvi 
fateneey XIV 

: ANT iv 
SST v 71; xiv 

59 Grr : 
15 :? X1V 
ae lvi 

= fee Ixv 
ee yen Ixv 
21 9S | iv 

2. | se Xiv 
65 | FITS Xvi 


ey iv 
PEER Ixxvii 
AT v 19; Wiii 
ATCT xlviii 
ages Ixix 
»BT iv 30; xi 43; liv 
199A liv 
mx iv 25; xiv 
STAT v 
ataez * xxii 
cet lv 
ryOQd Xiv 22, 
Bart liii 
ATT XIV 
rene Ixxxvi 
Rzaie Ixxxvi 20, 
Rata XIV 
FMI xl viii 
BRAT ii 
BPH vii 5, 95 ix 24; x 4; 
xv 1, 28; ci 
HOT 1Xxxi 
HUOTAIS Xiv 
oe : 
mas }xxviii 
rh) Xiv 12; xvi 
ayn IxXvii 
gel ee, Xiv 
ol | cv 
are Xiv 
BOTT xiv 24; * Ii 
THT Xiv 


aleat iX 


Ta Ixxvi 
RATA ]exix 
STFC OIES Xiv 
mUAATT liv 
tar XX 
UAE ix 26; x 4; 12; xiv 7; 

Xvi 6; Ixxx 
RIAA Ixxxvi 
Rees Xiv 
aeYSUT Xvi 
Fis Xi 
, forex xiv 
7 | iV 
ra ‘* ec |, 
keer iv 
atta XVi 
», erat Xvi 
yeaa lviii 
= Ke | ii (18); xiti 
ROIS XiV 
fenerteter IXXXvi 


RIS xiv 24; lvi 6; Ixxxvi 
XIV 
XCViit 
X1V 
Xiv 
]xxxv 
Xiv 
Xeviii 
xiv 
Xiv 


waft 'xxvi 9; lix 5; Ixxxv 
GMa x 12; xiv 6, 30; |xix 
WaT 


Xiv' 
TH ix 
TOT, xi 
TONCIST Xiv 
srftte: i 
Tey iii 44; xxiv 
THITATTT XXXvi 
THT xxvii 
TT cd, 
TAS Xi 62; Ixxxvi 
TESAM Ge 
Wt xi 1; xxi 2; xxiii 


xxiv 2; xlvi 1; “Ixxxvi 
eT 


XiV 

TUT CIV 
TTT XIV 
MFA iv 23; xiv 28; ]xix 
1XxXvi 

arreatiftent Xvi 
farfterarz X1V 
farftarsr x 
sftfer civ 49, 
TAT IXXxi 
a XIV 
Bug liv 
JIE XiV 
TUT lvi 
Teast liti 
ay ix 
wae IXXvi 


Xvi 
26 | hearer ai 
22 | tt ix 13; xiv 
1| 7 [xxxvi 
25 pate xlv 
14| »aat xvi 
9 yned Xvi 
7 wat )xxx 
OTe Xvi 
14 | , faez cv 
4 paratt ix 
1 ata IXxXvi 
87 | mz xiv 
2; | , wala Xiv 
3 Aad Vv 
28 trad ill 
34 | gz lvi 
31 i Ixxvii 10, 
26; FF 
40 | 
a ie vii 
ate xiv 2, 
11 | _— eo 
14 ) 
54 aah Xiv 
8 TGTA lvi 
3 TI tur lvi 
100 AT Cc 
18 ae <4 Blvd lxxx 
40 pistol Xvi 
1 | BIH 1 21; Ixxvii 
10 | Bear ; 


XVI 


TTH Ixxxvi 
ATH liii 
THT xiv 
TALF Xiv 
TIA Xi 
Al TAT Xcviii 
ACH Cc 
po CANS Ly lxxXv 
ATHTR IXxxvi 
ATTT xiv 
ALAN i 
AAT xxii 
aredat iX 
aTqT 1xxxvi 
xiv 13; xvi 
RIT vii 11; ix 30; x 10; xi 
XV 
fatearern XIV 
att =. v.77; xiv 30; xvi 
Fe liii 
A 1xxxi 
ate xi 59; xiv 8 xvi 
De X1V 
AeTTT ii 
NS vy 40; xiv 13; xvi 
xxvii 
wT Tet xl vili 
oT xxiii 
ac lxxxvi 
Sry Ixxxvi 
TATATST oc 
STEFT lxix 


WETTT, XIV 
see lxv 
TeTTT XIV 
STSUF XiV 
WT liv 8; Ixxxy 
TIFT hii 
Hardt lx 
WIT xiii 40; Ix 8; xcix 
TCT Vv 
WUT iX 
SCE TG | xi 
TS ix 
HAH HA i 
arate XI viii 
arcgat ix 
siteaa lix 
stage Ix 
Dig Xiv 


FYBT iv 7; vill; vii 10; x 


XV 16; xxiil; ci 
sattercaedt liv 
sareivea Ixxx 
SAT xiv 
aat Ixxxi 
aartere Xiv 
TTT Ixxvii 7, 
axe ix 7; x12; xiv 

Xvi 
Aas XXiv 
TART v 
ATHT xi 20; Ixxxvi 
array ]xxXvi 


aTaATA xiv 16; Ixxxi 
ATH Sa Xiv 
aretarter Xiv 
aTTT XXXili 
ates XIV 
MAAMSH iii 7; xi 

XXi 
aS XiV 
farfer ti 
faaaqoreast —_xcix 
faege iv 50; Ixxix 
fae liv 37, 
efteur vii 
efteurerarsrrtar Keviii 
Grate Xiv 
TUTATT XiV 
Ca [xxvii 
Fae Xiv 
afae . ome 
NER CIV 
TAROT IXXvili 
aa XIV 
ay xl viii 
yt XIV 
m8 Vv 
Ole XIV 
farariar i 
Prana CV 
(pear liv 


“Xvi 


56 


3 | eaET iii 6; viii 23 

7 | THIS liv .99 

21 | Tecra v 8 
1 zranaTy v 81 

11 | Ternreg v 81 
22;|%TS ii (15); xx 2; xxx 8, 16; 
25 xlvii 19; lili 41; civ 61 
92; FISH xi 56; xiv 16;xvi 11 
(9) | qretigan xiv 27 
| etiey Ixxx 3 

2 | edcH xiv 6 

50 | qtt vy 42; xiv 29 
8) Taz xiv 11 

7 | FarqT xiv 12 

15 | Taree Iviii 30 
25 | 1 ii (14) 
23 | Tartar xiv 10 
22| eT ix 1; xi 32; xilvii 4 
3 alent Ixxxv 7 

39 | ata ii (15) 
RRACIC SS ev 15 
25 | ata xiv 30 
65 | SPAT v 67; xiv 26 
31 | araaTz xiv 28 
39 | favre ii (19) 
9| fata xlviii 68; liii 45 

(14) | fafae xiv 31 
14| &e ixxxvi 12 
4g | dreastra xiv 23 
(4) | frente xiv 23 
24 | Sterare xlviii - 16 
24 ftateat xiv 23 


< 


tas 


TAA 


vii 15; 


‘TAB ii 1; vii 2; ix 3; x 


viii 50 

viii 48 

viii 38 

iv 10 

liv 37, 47 
Ixxix 2 
xlviii 67 
xil; xxiii 4; 
Ixxxvi 1 
xi 35 

civ 23 

liii 44 

x 15; xiv 19; 
xvi 2, 11 
Ixxxvi 2 
civ 20 

ii (14) 

Xx1 32 

ii (14) 

ii (14) 
xlvili = 65 | 
ii (15) | 

xlviii 67 | 
Ixxxvi 32 
16; 

xv 21; ci 12 
Xiv 24 

Xx 2 
Ixxxil3, 15 
xiv 14 

“iv 3 

; liv 105 


BE Vili 
aT Ixxxvi 
frac Ixxxvi 
feycury XXXiil 
ae Ixxix 
TAs xl 
qiaat Ixxxvi 
wT XI 
»THCT c 
yaad Xt 
5 TATRA xeviii 
Tata ii 
TAATFOT cv 5, 6, 
TT Ixxvii 13, 
Avey Ix 
TAT viii 4, 
TTT VTL XIV 
Tegel vill 38; lvi 
Tea XCiX 
afer Ivi 
wat xliii 
TaITAT lili 
Bats ho Ixxxvi 
THOT CIV 
TAT v 64; xvi 
aie Ixxvii 
TATA AT liv 
TATA ii 
TACIT X1V 
UIT ii 
TET ix 1; xlvii 4; c 
AUT RAT Ixxvii 


Ixxvii 
xivil 


AIAAALT ii 
TILT xi 5; Xxiv 
ATCT cv 
AIS XIV 
atsaT X1V 


xiv 13; xvi 


fare IXxx1 
19 liv 119; lvi 
Rar Vv 
ate XXXIV 
Ris liv 
95 XXXIX 
saa xiii 
sMIZUIZ X1V 
he IXxix 


dtq xiv 2; liv 119; Ixxxv 


oftcrstet xliv 
ate Ixxx 
atacaa XiVv 
Vat ii 
ae liti 
Ite XIV 
paraeaat i 10; xvii 

XXIV 
’ ary XIV 
oT Ixxvii 5, 12, 
a | xxvii 
9,0QT CiV 
ast XIV 
”» a Ixxix 


13 | Tara xi 
17 | o> eta cv 
(14) | yay Ixxx 
2 : yeart XVI 
14 RTT viii 
17 | 4QTaE xi 1; xxi 2; xxiii 
9 xxiv 2; Ixi 
12} fT xlvii 19; Ixxxvi 
17 | ,,fcertter viii 
5 | aS xvii 
43 | , rarer viii 
2) far iii 345 v 
14 | », Bae liv 
1: ster hii 
47 |  mRTTT xiv 
10 |, iii 6; Vv 
32 + ARTS Vv 
6 | Te liv 
1 | »aa xiv 
4, ogTle xiv 
27 Gigs =v 35x 4; xiv 3, 
(4) | -forere c 
38 | ,Terate Ixxxl 
21 | ATER liti 
1: | S1Sat vil 
S| tet x5; xiv 21; Xvi 
30 | cate Ixxxi 
23 | zara XiV 
29 | aT xvi 
55 | tiara [xxvii 27, 
5 CATA V 
2 | kere viii 


aradt 
STATA 
pat 
ft 

Ee 
ROL 
aT 

yI SI 


yb 
ics 


iv 30, 


Ld 


lviii 
iV 

lv 
1b:0.6.6 
Vill 
Ixxxvi 37, 
1Xxxi 
liv 

litt 
viii 
liv 
Ixxxvi 
IXXXVv1 
X1V 

liv 65, 


CIV 


vil2; vii 10; ix 
x 6; xv 5; ci 
lv 

X1V 

IV 

XX 

ii (18); xiii 
Ixxx 

11(18); xiii 

iv 22; xvi 

Vv 

xiv 26;éxvi 
Ixxx 


59 


43 | aferater ay 
13| »ST ii (18); vi 7, ix 2; x 
4 xv 6; ci 
17 PAS EC il 
4g) 4 Ixxvii 
49 | yee liii 
17 | UT XCIX 


- THe 


vi 6; vii 7, 


jae 6; x 1,8; xv 9, 28: oi 
i UATE TT vi 12; vii 7, 


iX 2.34; xv 28, 23; xxi 
96 ci 
38] aut vii 7, 11; ix 3, 
: x14, cj 
14) a5 liii 
75 qatar liti 
43 TivE xiv 7; lxxx 
70| {Ta xiv 27, 
10 qifear ii 
8 | Wad Vil 
2:| SITE viii 24; xl viii 
4| eet \iii 
3 | pad 1 
10 | ta Vill 
221 , Fat IXXxvi 
2| rife viii 
5 | arte viii 
4| , fener civ 
6 aT Vili 
2| sore liii 
68 | sate xxx 
26 | ,areatte xiv 
5| aa civ 


evo civ 


TST T xiv 6; Xvi 


UT i 
: TAT ]XxXXvi 
get XX 
frag Ixxvii 23; Ixxxv 
ga liv 
i | Vill 
nl Vili 
HesR XiV 
SAUCES XIV 
qortirkt xiv 
IHS liv 
azt liv 16, 17, 72, 74, 

Ixxxv 
argaita Ixx 
Tat XIV 
aera xlvii 
Tes xxx 


TsIq \ viii 
ISCAS aT xiv 


afte \viii 
i f cl, 
aefirtt XVi 
THArT Vili 
FICE a Xiv 
qo c 


faca liv 18; lxxxv 3, 
fersererst liv 
Tz viii 


17 aedt ]xxxv 


26 | Tecate hii 
22 | Taga lxi 
1) seer viii 23; xxiv 
(4) 1Xxxxvi 
12 | Tavs xi 
2 | AAT v 19; iii 
7 | AMT Xiv 
119 | Berarter Ixxx 
39 | erate i 
44 | BAIL 5: ii 2; v 14, 19; xxiv 
23 viii 
12, Tia Ixxiv 
1g | 7 viii 


119) Ws xiv 1, 16; Ixvii 1; Ixix 
75; | aa tlate XC1X 


5 waa ix 
6 | WCU vii 5, 9; ix 6, 35; x 1, 
18 | xv 27, 30; ci 
2 ATaIT Ixxxvi 2, 
3 WORE xiv 11; xvi 
36 , Wert XIV 
16 | ASTTH liii 45, 
30 | Waey xi 
3 | TTR Ixxxvi 
26 | AVTaAT Ix 


33 | arrapit Ixxxvi 
19 | arodtx IXxxv 


1 wea XXvii 

5 | arcaray — Xiv 
105 | ares Viii 
44 | ATa Ixxxvi 


31 
38 


XVI 
Ixxxvi 
XVI 

liii 

Civ 

CIV 
XIV 

liti 


hii 43, 


CIV 


ii 2; v 
lx 


ATT iv 26; xiv 6, 32, xvi 
AAT vi 8, 9, 12; vii 9; ix 2, 
x 7; xv 8; xxi 29; ci 


rita 
aiforszorfez 
afore 
qs 


ATF 


Ixv 


lxix 31, 
Ixxx 

C1V 

Vv 

iv 26; xvi 
vii 


liv 


61 


11 | Ag v 40; x 4; xiv 22, 
30 | ARR Xiv 
9 TIT xivi 
45 | WATT cv 
42 | TYR liv 35; Ixxxv 
47 | Tera Vv 
27 | weaa Ixxxvi 
15 | meqhyecor v 
63 | Ag xix 11; liv 99, 110; lvi 
44 | atatrs xvi 
63 WaT Ivi 
(15) | wera evi 
25 | aezifeet Xvi 
12 | ARETE civ 
25 | wearer viii 
411 wa xxiv 2; lvi 
19 ATH xxx 4; Ixxxiii 
1 | were ii (18); xiii 
14; | We v 40; xiv 
6 | AUHSS Xiv 
3 | TEAIST xiv 
44 | ree xliii 
27 | weez Xiv 
20 | AS v 
10 | Tae xliii 
37 | neta Xiv 
7 | wetdte Ixxx 
26 | wercifeer xlviii 
38 | Fatad Xxiv 8; xxvi 
17 | wie ix 
5 | wet xvi 
102 | aarx xiv 11; xvi 


aret 


arattnargy 


arerett 
WINES 
Wvssyz 


IXXVil 

Ixxvi 

Civ 

XIV 

xiv 2, 22; civ 
Ixxxvi 


Xiv 

xlvilt 

XIV 

XVi 

xvi 10; civ 
XIV 
xix 
Ixxxvi 
CIV 
XIV 
XIV 
liv 

ii 

v 22; li 
x 14; xiv 
Vv 

Ixxxvi 
Ixxx 

Civ 

liti 

liv 

XiV 
xxvii 


62 
24 aed ii 
3 | quale lili 
54 | St vi 11, 12; vii 6, 11; ix 


27 | x 2; xv 17; ct 
3, aT ix 1; xlvii 4; lili 
30 | Ixvil 
4 : wT vii 2,9; ix 2; x 
a Xv 3; ci 
14c2 Ix 
7 | ar gatecat xevili 
og | LereraTter xeviii 
18 | HRS v39; xiv 7; xvi 
26 | a XIV 
14 Az xiv 24; lvi 
| RET XIV 

. | iat liv 
37 Wa v 19; \vili 
34 TATA li 
11 aya XV1 
5 | Tamra xviii 
gg | TAT ii 14; ix 21; xiv 18; Xvi 
(4) | XiV 
47 | ae il 
¢ | aA il 
42, | AeA Xiv 
12, atta xvii 
5 | x ii 
Z| aratex xiii 
45 | ya viii 
103 : WNT vii 


31 | areret * ij 
10 | {rary _ iv 25; v 40; xiv 


(4), 


CHAT Viii 
AEA —-xxxvili 1, 3, 
AeA Civ 
WAS x 5; xiv 21; xvi 
ot Ixxxvi 
yah Ixxxi 
Saag Xl 
mS | Ixxvii 23; Ixxxii 
Tata Vill 
sere liti 
Tey 1xxx 
tae lini 
TAT i 
a lviil 


far i 


xlv 
fearftata XC1xX 
eras xiv 
VIF lui 28; lxix 
GATT C1V 
az Vill 
afar Ixxx 
afacratiz viii 
afar vi 
Rs Ixxxvi 38, 
QtTa7 CV 
ty Ixxvii 
tad vii 6; ix 2; x 18; xv 

ci 
tara Lviii 
taae dvi 


THT 


hii 


63 


51 | Care ii (4); xvi 
g | crfeuft vi 6, 9, 10, 11; vii 2, 
1x 2; X 4; xxi 28; ¢j 


31 
a | SMeA xviii 16; xivii 
37 Ixxxvi 
17 | Ceerrer liv 
4 | Teeter liv 
1 | Uz viii 49; xj 
47 CEA liv 
83 peat civ 
4. eet civ 
47 | waaz Civ 
(14) veetRe xxvii 
30. BE Vv 
(14) | Stee xvi 
2 seat XIV 
2 | aUTTIT AT CIV 
13 | Ita ClV 
7 | Tay vi 
a4 TAT Vii 
24 TF v 72; xiv 8; Xvi 
4 : iv 19; XX 2; XXi 
50 | Ivii 8; Ixxx 
4 | ce Es: J liii 
ie | TAIe lvii 
6 | qa TT lvii 
5 TAS liv 50; Ixxxvi 20, 
25: qwayga XIV 
14 | ace x5; Xiv 
56 | Acetate Ixxix 
3) | TATIST XiV 
45 TTS XIV 


ee oN 


arate xiv 12; xvi 
attire, ¢ 
aueiaec Ixxxvi 
THTVST civ 
qe v 19; xi 26; xxxiv 


litt 44; lviii 


Fas liv 
AAA xiv 7; xvi 3; lili 
TT ii 
qasTT xxx 
qated ill 
TATA ATH civ 
TAH XI 
qatar XiV 
artery ii (4), (18); xiii 5; viii 
arrest Vv 
qWaIet XIV 
TAMIT xliii 
aga XIV 
TCA xiv 26; Xvi 
ate lili 
ara Xu 
arate lv 
arate Vv 
Sat Ixv 9; cv 
qaTh Ixix 
aay Vv 
Wass Vv 
ATT XXXiV 
arcrat liv 
aes xxvii 
WAR lxxvii 10, 


6 | aterte kxxxi 
4 | alegre lili 
4| areata ix 10; xvi 
62 | ener Ge 
23 fanart vil 
57 | feranrit viii 
50 | farater viii 
36 | Faena viii 
23 | faae i 
7 | fare viii 
23 | fasrat xliii 40; xcix 
33 | faze XVi 
29 | ex lv 7, 
25 | fraey liii 
8 fetatet ClV 
V2 fart XIV 
31 Ferarft lili 
40 faatitent Ixxvi 
24 | fagee xxviii 
22 fate v 41; 1x 13; xvi 
41) ferere xxxiii 
L | fae lix 
10 farearzet XvV1 
81 | farcatf xvi 
14 | farcorariery | ciii 
31 faqrer XVI 
81 | fage civ 
81) farfrara liv 24, 
2 | fanaa Ixxx 
87 | faanerrser lvi 
7 | fafeer ‘ vii 
13 | face xvi 


Vili 
Peresfeer viii 
facredt vi¥j 
Peresftaerarfer civ 
ferester Civ 
feresriereft Civ 
Ferererrez lili 


46 


Perarrert iv 6; vi 9; vii 12:ix 3,31: 


X11, 19; xv 14: ci 


Faereyy ivi 29: xxix 
fasrey Xi 
Roary viii 
ferrarears: Ixxxvi 


fafirecor xevili 13; ¢ 1, 


Frey viii 23; iii 31; cv 

Ix 
adtcrzay liv 
Te lvi 
sort xiii 2, xlviii 
ga viii 34; lvi 18; xiv 
TTT ix 
arate civ 
Tye xiv 
worry iv.26; xiv 12; lxxx 
Rtrrreft XIV 
were > liv 
aired Xvi 
arerd xvi 
auger Ixxxv 
oft Ixxx 4; Ixxxiv 
” otf 34, 


9 
10 


rh fl Xiv 
’ areety ClV 
9 UTE Ixxxvyj 
» ter ¢ 
araror Xiv 
saferqre P 
Ty Viii 
SOTA Ta Ixxvij 
STTaTT liv 
ATT Sa Xiv 
STS vi 
saressttey xiv 
PUL v 38; xvi 
VS TAT Ixxxvi 
wala e 2; 
cu Y Ixxvii 10; Ixxx 
wag Xvi 
TAGs xxvii 
AFA vii 6, 115ix 3, 34; x 
17; xv 22; xxi 29: oj 
wqTt Vv 38; xvi 
wat liv 81, 85; Ixxxy 
QIZQT xxix 
TILT iii 23; v 
WIT Xiv 
Rrear lvii 
arr Ixix 
arett v 19, 
“weet Ixxvi, . 


eae xi 


QTR liv 105; xxix 2, 
+ Galt lxxxvi 
23a lx 
AT i 
rt lx 
ere XIV 
Toa | lviil 
aract viii 
Tetras Civ 
9905 xxix 
et lik 6; Ixxix2; Ixxxv 


‘5 Civ 
ciV 
liti 

liv 105; Ixxix 


stachrit 
’ aft iv 


tT liv 50; lxxx 6 Ixxxv 


PY 1 | Ixxvi 
emt Ixxxvi 
a | Xxxiv 2; lviii 53; lix 


liv 87; lxxxvi 


9° iii 


Xiv 
Fo fa Ixxxvi 
PAT xvii 
GIST viii 
2 § Xiv 
Cee lxix 
ates xiv 


13 aaifer Xiv 
31 | 58 Xi 
19|,,f8% ix 21; xiv 23; xvi 
9 | HSH ii (18); xx 
19 | Sere xxvii 
20 | steer Ixxvii 13, 
40 | ater xvi 
39 | ater liti 
4 antvea ]XXXvi 
13 | sitter xiv 
7 ! SAIL xiv 
30 : SATA liv 87; lxxxv 
8 Ixxxvi 
43 | SITAR Xiv 
2 | STANT vi 7, 11; vii 2; ix3; x 
12 16; xv 20; xxii 2; ci 
6 | othe lxxvii 
24 | oftaue lxxxvi 
4 | oftercr Ixxxvi 
3\ofaxr cv 
30 | ofr liv 
7 | shade xvi 
37 | sftacer viii 
23 | efrarars Ixxvii 


27 | aa civ 
1 | aqa XIV: 
66 | tae xi 
41 | TER Ixxxvi 
I8;efee 1 30; Ixxvi 
26 | reefer 

5 | Sarat vii 


lvi 


Vili 


xi 51; xx 


Xlviii 


liti 
x] vill 
x] viii 
xviii 
Xl viii 
i 
XX 
liv 
XIV 
XX 
XX 
CIV 
x]viii 
xlv 
XX 

> Xlvili 
lix 
lili 
lvi 
liti 
av 
xxx 
bfx 31, 


19 | Brean: xlviii 
5 | nt li 
66 | sTay liii 
(15) | , Teter liv 
(12) | , far liv 
3 | eg v 76; Xiv 
8 | mo ii 
2| EAT lil 
81 | fer lx 
43 feeeer Lexx 
64 | STE titi 
64 | 587 xlviii 
64 ste: xviii 
64 stare xlviii 
(15). s® Sate liv 
: | oF iv 23; x 6; xiv 17, 
9. TR lix 

| 2 argh XIV 

5 | ° | te lvi 

; paige Ixxxvi 
63 | ee xiv 15; lxxxi 
71 | ET Y 
, | Rates ' 
5 fast Xvi 
56 fer Ixxvii 7, 
, | Sam lili 
$1 ata liii 44, 
18 eat! bes | lvili 
46 1) xlvill 
42 | ote x 6; xxx 
5 TEC Civ 
39 | , wares liv 


55 
(15). 
21 
99 
87 
2 
(15) 
21 
22 
17 


x 
CiV 
li 


et v 37; xiv 5; xvi 
TROTTT [xxix 
enteenT liv 
a lii 
after xiv 
ater lit 
areottey lit 
arritera 1xxx 
ng ii (4), 
te xiv 9; xvi 
steerer Xiv 
Rice lxxx 
ate Xiv 
atc iV 
SHrg xliii 52; xlviii 
CHrTR civ 
POR xiv 22; xvi 
SIT ii 
TIS ii 
feat CIV 
CITT Ixxix 
CERT ixxvii 5, 
eifes xxx 
wrertrrt Ixxvii 
CHT lix 
civ 


Steg 
wets 12; Ixxx 10; Ixxi 


68 


6 | Srrar 


Civ 


7 | warat vii 9: ix 16, 31; x1, 


21 
1 


32 
88 
43 
29 
45 
20 


xiv 19; xv 13; xxi 29; xxii 
ci 

STS Xl viii 
gt xxviii 
COTTA Civ 
iT Ixxix 
9 liv 
rae lxxvi 3, 11; lxxvii 
ea vi 18; Ixix 
te Xiv 22; Xvi 
cS Xiv 
eet = vi 12; vii 4,12; x 1, 
xi 56; Xv 

sf TATTT xiv 
EITHIT Xiv 
wet Ixxxvi 
fra IXXXvi 
4 xxvii 
area Xiv 
eceqant liii 
A XIV 
edie ov 
eager xiv 
tat XIV 
tua Xiv 
tara iii 
Xiv 


19 
10;. 


INDEX 


N. B.—The Roman and Arabic numerals opposite to each refer respecti- 
vely to the Adhyaya to which it belongs and to the number of the Sloka therein. 


ABANDONMENT oa XLVI—58 
ABDOMEN —Elephant to have a huge — ae LXVII—2 
Horses having hairy circles on the — a LNVI—2 
Men with the upper part of the —dry »» LXVITL—Ii+ 
ABHEERAS—will be destroyed oie IX-——-19 
In the south are situated the— bes NIV—12 
—will suffer vee V—38 
Saturn presides over the-— See XVI-31 
ABHIJIT—.\ moveable comet touching the star-... NI-—-34 


If Ketu touches —,clouds will be destroyed .... XLVII--12 
The star--appertains to the circle of Indra, .... NAXII-—16 


The star~~belongs to the merchant class, ... NV — 29 
When star —is attacked, artists and artistes 
will suffer. we => XNAIII--19 
ABHISARAS-—are situated in the north. ‘ye NIV-——29 
An earthquake of Indra’s circle will bring 
trouble to the— ae ANNALI—19 
ABLUTION—To be conversant with—s. se lI—(3) 
To worship the idols with—s. sae XLVI-15 
To worship a tree with-—s. “eek LV—3 
Performance of royal—s, we ALVITI--3-17 
Brihaspati taught the -s, = =>ANALVIDT—86 
ABNORMAL—births. sl XCVII-—+ 
ABORTION—Prediction of—in the case of a 
woman. sas LI--38 
Prognostication of--of a pregnant woman ... LI— 35 
Women will suffer —when ae V—85 


Effect of an omen in the 3rd Division from 
S. E. causes the-of one’s wife we =o LANA VII--32 
ABSENCE—in other flaces sae CllI—7 
B, Ss. l, 


2 INDEX 


ACCOUNTANTS -_ XIX—10 
ACHALA bes XXXII—4 
ACQUISITION-———of wealth. st XC—15 
ACROBATS—Danger from or to— wv. DLXXXVII-—33 
ACTORS——are allotted to Purvaphalguni ... XV—9 
Mercury presides over— se XVI--20 
Junction of roads filled with— os XLUI—26 
When Veuns is behind Mereury at rising or 
setting,—will be ruined, sae IX—43 
ADAMANTINE-——glue. sis LVII—3 
ADARSAS a XIV—25 
ADHAKA si XNXIII--2 
ADHIMASA be Ii—(5) 
ADITI~— V—-2, XLVIII—56, LLIIL~-45, 52, 56, 63; XCVITI—4 
ADITYA—Daughter of Brahman, sh XXVI—5 
—name of the Sun, or XCIX-~ 1 
ADITYADASA-——, father of Varahamihira ... CVI-6 
ADULTERER-—To Kartika are assigned—s. ... XV—-4 
Ketu presides over —s, sais XVI-~39 
ADULTERESS--The lady of the house 
would be an-~when on LAXXIX-~-8 
AERIAL CHARIOT— _ XLVI--90 
AERIAL CITY—Time when effecits of——ies 
will be felt. us XCVII-~13 
an-~in the four quarters ih XXXV{-~1 
an—seen in the north SAXVI--2Z 


an army similar to an—scréening the Sun's S oe 
at Sunrise or Sunset ay XLVII-—26 
an-~in all directions and at all times VP XAX VI--—3 


Atmopheric portents consist of——ies cu XLVI-—4, 5 

Clouds in the form of an-— oe tae XXX—21 

Multi-coloured— vst XXXVI~——5 

White-—of clouds, XXX—~23 
AERIAL VOICE——in the dewy season proves 

beneficial sas XLVI---92 
AFFECTION~Husband’s— CilI—13 


AFFLICTED—One born in Purvabhadra will hae. CT——1 ? 


INDEX 3 


AFGANS-~-A comet hit by ‘a meteor will become 


unfavourable to the— 5a XI--61 
Ketu presides over-— ee XVI--38 
AFTERNOON-~The —time is not favourable 
for a query. aa LI--6 
AGARU—~—Venus presides over — as XVI--30 
—-is one of the substances of the Gandharnava 
perfume .. DLUXXVII-~—13 
The body of the person of the Bhadra class 
will smell like— ied LXIX-~16 
North-easterly breeze scented by-— _ XXVII--9 
An omen crying in the 19th Division will get... LXXXVII-—11 
AGASTHYA—The—chara wes * [I—(18) 
Course of sage— .. AlI—~I, 8, 13, 
14, 15-17, 20 
AGATE wed LXXX—6 
AGE-—For ascertaining the —— of a person sie XCVI—17 
AGHRATA—A variety of the eclipse. a V-—43, 50 
AGNEEDHRAS i XIV——-25 
AGNI-——is the, lord of one of the six a 
siunce creation, V—~—19 
Effect of the six month-period swayed by—... V---22 
~~, lord of one of the Yugas ... WITT-—23, 24, 26 
Ketus born of-— sai X[--23 
To Visakha are assigned men devoted to—... AV—14 
Place where--should be kindled. .. MLVITI-~-34 
White is the colour produced by— Sie XAANIV--2 
The quarter where authority is excercised 
by— LITI~—49; LXXXVI—75 
-~is situated on the head of the House-God ... LYII-—51 
Effect of the door being at— LIII--70 
AGNIHOTRA-—~To Krittika are assigned Brahmins 
performing daily— sie XV—!1 
AGNIMANTHA——,a sacrificial material wee XLIV--9 
AGRICULTURIST—Trouble to the-- set IV--9 
~-8 will be destroyed when ee {V--29 


-: The—s will prospar when ses VITI-~-52 


& INDEX 


—-§ are assigned to Rohini. 
The Moon presides over—s. 
Fire seen in the west bodes evil to—s. 
A dog barking at the Sun at Sunset indicates 
immediate danger to—s, 
AHI——One of the deities in the ground plan of a 
house 


AHIRBUDHNYA-—Lord of one of the 12 Yugas 
in the Jupiter’s Cycle. , 
—js the presiding deity of the star Uttara 

bhadra. 

AHORATRA 

AIR 

AIRAVATA--Name for a line of clouds, 

Pearl— 

AIRY 

AJA-—A road ascribed to Venus 
Effect of planets moving in-— 

Name of a herb. 

AJAIKAPAT 

AJAKARNA 

AJAMODA 

AJAVEETHEE 

AKARA 

AKRANDA KINGS--The Moon presides over 
the— es 

AKRANDA—The Sun when standing in the 
meridian is called-—— 
planets 

AKSHAVALANA 

ALAKAS 

ALLIES 

ALMS 

ALTAR 
Symptoms of the— 


XV—--2 
XVI--8 
XXXI-~-4 


LXXXIX--4 


LITI--45, 49s 


54, 56 
VITI--23 


XCVIII—5 
Ii—(4) 
LXVIII--93 
ALVII--20 
LXXXI--20 


LXVITI--110 


IX--1 
XLVIT—4 
XLVITI-41 
ACVITI-—-5 
ALITI—15 
LXAXVI—11 
IX--3 
XIV--12 


XVI-—7 


AVII-~—6 
XVIT—8 
V—18 
XI-~-58 
XXXIV—22 
LXXIV-—13 
XLVIII—15 
XLIV—14 


INDEX 5 


Damsels having marks of-~s on their soles or 


feet attain to the status of queens. Jas LXX—10 
AMALAKA— LV—~-22; LVII—6 
AMAVASYA XI—31 
AMATORY TALK LXXVI—2: LXXVIII—12 
AMBA Pee LXXIX—17 
AMBUPATI sie LITI—50 
AMBARAVATA vee XIV—27 
AMBASHTAS IX~—-19; XIV—17; XVI—22 
AMETHYST at LXXX—4 
AMIABLE ee CI~—11 
AMIABLE PERSONS:-—To Purvaphalguni are 

assigned— ea xV-—-9 
AMNESTY bee XLVIII—81 
AMOGHA-—Sun beams called-— ANAVITI—18; XXX—11 

The long rays of the Sun at rising or setting 

are named-— aa XLVII—20 
AMOROUS—intoxication we ~~» LXXVII—37 
AMOROUS TALK -- DUXXVITI~—12 
AMRATAKA --» LIV-50; LV-11 
AMRITA CREEPER de XLIV—9 
AMSUMARDANA XVII—3 
ANALA ss VIII—47 
ANALA JEEVEE os» LXXXVI—29 
ANANDA VITI—47 
ANANTA XXXV—2 
ANARTAS—Saturn presides over the — XVI—3] 

The-—will parish ose V—80 
The tracts of the—-lie in fhe South west. ... XIV—17 
ANDEERAKA ee LXXXVIII—26 
ANDHRA—The Chiefs of—will be killed XI—59 
is situated to the South-east of Bharata 

Varsha, ; XIV—8 

People in—will come to grief when Saturn 

is overcome by Mars. re XVII—25 


ANDRAPOGON—a kind of grass ae XXX—29 
“known in Sanskit as Useera LV~-7; LIV—121: 
LXXVII—12 


6 INDEX 


ANGA-—Trouble to the people of— ; a 
Fright in the country of— 
When Saturn is in Purvashadha, people 
of —will come to grief. 


When Saturn is defeated by Mercury, the. 
—sgs, will be afflicted. er 


During an earthquake, the—s. will be 


V-—-72 
IX—10 


X14 


XVII-~ 26 


affected. AXXNIT--15 
ANGARA LITI—61 
ANGARI LXXXVI—12 
ANGAVINISCHAYA se I-—9 
ANGELS nie XITI--8 
ANGER—To become subjected to— VITI—51 
ANGIRAS— | II—(18) 
(One of the seven Sages) XLVIII—63 
Name of the first year of the second of the 
Yugas. VIlI—31 
—is situated west of Marichi XMI—5 
ANGLERS—are assigned to Satabhishak. XV-—-22 
ANGUSHTIKA-— L1IV-—-109 
ANILA—,a deity in the South-eastern corner se a 
house LILI—43, 48, 55, 63, 72, 73 
ANIMAL—Group of-—s crying pleasantly in the 
north | XXI—16 
~-s and birds not facing the Sun send forth 
their melodious notes. 5 XXX—7 
Flames from—s are said to forebode danger ... ALVI-~22 
Release—from the hands of butchers XLVITI-~81 
Increase of domestic— LXXII-—6 
Effect of a wild—standing at the town gate. ... XCI—3 
Effect of wild—s standing in the border 
of a town. XCI-~2 
Effect of¢wild—s standing in a ‘burning’ 
quarter, | - XCI—} 
ANJANA—Name of a mountain. XIV—5 
A kind of tree LIV—50; LXXVII-—~32 


ANKLES~—~Effect of pimples on the— = ¢ 


eee 


LIIl—7 


_ INDEX 7 
ANKLE-JOINT LXI—4, UXVIITI-2, LXX-—1, 24 
ANKOLA LIV—51];. LV—27 


ANNIHILATION —of the population. 
ANOINT—The preceptor should—the King.  \,,... 
Hymn for the—ing ceremony. 
ANT—% shifting their eggs is a sign of rain. 
—s laying eggs on water bespeak drought. 
ANT:-HILL—Effect of a rain-bow seen on an— ... 
Trees growing ins are not good for making 
Indra’s banner. 
Effect of an—prodtced on houses, 
A place free from—s. 


A house filled with--s will produce 
calamities. 


Effect of an—to the east of a Jumbu tree 
an—to the north of an Arjuna tree, 
an-—near a Nirgundi tree. 
an——to the east of a Jujube tree, 
an~~near a Kakodumbara tree. 
an-—to the south of a Vibhitaka tree. 
an-—to the west of a Vibhitaka tree. 
an-—to the north-east of a Kovidara tree. 
a Saptaparna tree surrounded by an 
an~—~to the south of a WKaranja tree. 
an-~to the north of a Madhuka tree. 
an-—to the south of a ‘Tilaka tree. 
an-~-to the west of a Kadamba tree. wad 
a palm tree or a cocoanut tree covered with—s... 
an—to the south of a Wood-apple tree. 
anto the north of an Asmantaka tree. 
an—to the north of a Haridra tree. faa 
—~s surrounding certain trees, 
an~-to the northeast of a Peelu tree, 
an-—to the east of a Peelu tree, sab 
an-~to the north of a tender bamboo. ot 
an--to the west of g Rohitaka tree, 
an=to the east of an Indra tree, 


XLVI-—-30 ALVIT—10 
XLVIII—50 
ALVITI—51 
XX VIII—7 
XCV—59 
XXXV—7 


XLITI—13 
XLVI—70 
XLVITI—16 


LUI—90 

LIV—9 
LIV—12 
LIV—14 
LIV—16 
LIV—19 
LIV—24 
LIV—25 
LIV—27 
LIv—29 
LIV—33 
LIV—35 
LIV—37 
LIV—38 
LIV—40 
LIV—41 
LIV—43 
LIV—45 
LIV—51 
LIV—63 
LIV—65 
LIV—67 
LIV—68 
LIV—69 


‘8 INDEX 


an-—to the north of a Golden tree. sae 

Durva grass on the top of an— 

Durva grass on an—in a place full of Kadamba 
trees, 

Rohitaka tree in the midst of three.---s. 

an—to the north of a knotty Samee tree. 

5—s in a place 

a white Kohitaka tree surrounded by an— 

Some specified creepers growing near an-— 

ground devoid of— 

an—seen at 4 cubits’ distance of a ground 

If in a row of—s one is taller than the rest. 

Trees grown in-—s should he avoided by the 
maker of images 

Elephant wantonly breaking —s, 

a crow cawing sitting on an-~- 

Sudden appearance of—s in a house. 


ANTARA CHAKRA— 
ANTARDWEEPA. 
ANTARIKSHA—Name of a deity LISI — 43, 


ANTELOPE—Bulls whose shanks resemble 
those of—— 


-~js strong in the north. 


i1—(18); 


LIV—70 
LIV—77 


LIV—78 
LIV—79 
LIV—81 
LIV—82 
LIV—8¢4+ 
LIV— 88 
LIV—90 
LIV—94 
LIV—95 


LIX—2 


XCIV—13 


XCV—=35 


XCVII-9 
LXXXVII 


XIV—25 
52, 56 


LX1-—~13 


. LXXXVI—23 


—is of no consequence in the winter season ... LXAXXVI-~-26 
—is to be treated as good for a journey. . LXXXVI-—-48 
ANTIMONY. LIV~121; LXXAII-—1 
ANTYADARANA. vV—90 
ANTYA VIDARANA. V-—81 
ANURADHA—Moon going through the South 
of—will prove malefic. 1V——6 
When Mercury passes thro—, it is called | 
Papakhya., : Vil——12 
The course of Venus is named Mriga when he 
sways over—, Jyeshta and Moola IX-~ 3 
When Venus is in—, there will be nr 
among Kshatriyas, X32 


When Saturn is in—, the Kulutas,  angaeaa: 
\ 


INDEX 9 


Khasas, etc. will come to grief. oe X—12 
A bad comet hitting—, the none of the Pandyas 
will die. ee XI—-58 
Things assigned to— | XV—15 
——belongs to the merchant class. Ge XV—-28 
The quantity of rain in—will be 14 Dronas, ... XXITL—7 
—appertains the Circle of Indra 6 NMNXIT—16 
Kings will be troubled when-—is struck. we AMNXITI—-19 
The Moon conjoining with—- ~ we SENSIS 
“eis one of the auspicous asterisms for commencing 
the sinking of wells. sed LIV—123 
—is one of the asterisms auspicious for planting 
trees, ms LV-"31 
—js a favourable star for the installation of 
deities. a LX—21 
Meeting a friend will be the result when a new 
cloth is worn at—- tae LXXI-~ 5 
Effect of a birth in— a CI—~9 
Vrischika comprises the whole of — oes CIl—4 
ANUS~—To suffer from pain in the - cies V—86 
—is a masculine limb. _ LI-8 
Pimples on the— eas Lil—6é 
Horses having hairy circles on the — sea LXVI—2 
Flame appearing in a horse’s— ie XCITI—2 
ANUVATSARA—Name of a lustrum ake VIIlL—24 
ANUVIDDHAS. oe XIV—-31 
APA-—A deity situated on the face of the 
House-God. sie LItI—51 
APACHAY.\. Malefies in-—houses. ee XLI ~11 
APAH—A deity near Brahman. .. LITL—48, 49 
Deity presiding over Purvashadha. | we XCVILI~5° 
APAMARGA. LIV—115; LXXXV-—7 
APAMVATSA—Name of a star due north of Chittra. XXV-—4 
APARANTHAKA. me XIV—20 
APARANTHYA. ad V—-40 
APASAVYA—One of the varieties of aneclipse ... V—=43 
. Name of the lunar gglipse if it commences 
from the north-east. ps V—44 


B.S. 2, 


10 | INDEX 


One of the 4 kinds of planetary conflicts. we XNVIT—“3, 5 
APAVATSA—.\ deity to the west of Brahman, LIII--47,49,51,56 


APHRODISIAC. : ae XVI—-28 
APTARY. ares LI-—5 
AQUATIC ANIMALS. People to be troubled by — IX—33 
Trouble to— Sk xX—7 
—are assigned to Rohini. bbs XV—-2 
Affliction to-— se SVIT—24 
Clouds in the shape of ~ ies XXI-— 23 
AQUATIC BEINGS—Omens through— we LXXXVI—6 
AQUATIC FRUITS. pay XV-—-25 
AQUATIC PRODUCTS. NV 3; 223. XVI—7 
When Mercury is defeated by Saturn,— 
will suffer. 26% XNVII—17 
One to get— .. LAXXVI[—17 
ARANI. _ se LITI~-120 
ARAVAS® - XIV--17 
ARBUDA MOUNTAIN. ae V—-68 
ARBUDAS~—Saturn presides over -- Ya XVI—31 
Trouble to the— .  NNXITI--19 
ARCH, The-—at the bottom of the standard must 
be fastened with tight nails. es XLITI—58 
Erection of a triumphal—to the north east of 
a town. it XLIV-—3 
A hermitage to be constructed south of the—... ALIV—8 
The falling down of an-indicates King’s 
death. es XLVI-—-74 
ARCHES—A strong rough wind crushing— .., XXX—6 
If triumphal—are burnt a XLV I-20 
If groups of birds sit on— us XLVI—70 
Damsels that have marks of—attain to the 
status of queens. LXX—10 
Effects due to the entry of wild animals is ‘ig 
village—will be felt ina year ie XCVII—8 
ARCHERS. wes XVITI—5 
ARCHWAYS.—for the installation @eremony. ... LX~—1 


Aslitin the form of an—brings fortune to men... LXXI~—13 


INDEX ; 11 


ARCHITECTURE. TI—(18);  Adh, LII[—21, 39-41 
ARDHA --A term to denote a collection of 
25 pearls. ww )=)lCO LD XX XI--17 
ARDHA-GUCHCHA, we LXXXI-—33 
ARDHA-MANAVAKA . LXXXI—33 
ARDRA—Course of Venus thro—- ‘ee IX—2 
Tour stars from—-form the second Mandala ... IX=12 
Effect of Venus when going through — ae IX——26 
Effect of Saturn's stay in— La xXx—I,.°5 
Effect of a malign comet eclipsing —- bbs XI—56 
Things assigned to— ah xV—4 
—belongs to the powerful class of cruel 
persons. cae XV—29 
Effect of Mercury passing thro-- om VIiI—3 
An embryo of cloud formed in— phe XXI—2p 
Quantity of rain in— ve XXIII—9 
Rain when the Sun is passing through--  .... XXVIII—20 
-~is one of the stars of the Varuna circle .... XXXITI-—20 
Eflect of —being struck by a meteor. .. XXXITI-19 
Wearing a new cloth in— sas LXXI—2 
Birth in-- ets CI-—3 
—belongs to sign Mithuna. a CII-—-2 
ARECA. Use of-—in chewing betel leaves. .. LXXVII-——-36 
ARECA NUTS—Gain of— .» LXXXVII—2 
ARGHA, .. LXXXI-—-17 
ARIES. ee CII—1 
ARIMEDA.—belongs to the central region a XIV—2 
ARISHT A. oo LIII—87 
Existence of tree indicaies water close by. ... LIV—105 
-~should be planted in gardens and near houses... LV—3 
—~tree is good for images and bestows prosperity 
on the Kshatriyas. Sea LIX—5 
ARISHTIKA, ... MLVITI—40 
ARJOUNA—When the Moon’s orb is cut by Saturn, 
the—s will suffer. ar IV—25 


_ 77, a tree best suited for making Indra’s banner. XLITI—15. 
There will be water at 15 cubits near an—tree... C—10) 


12 INDEX 


One should guess good rain from the —trees, ... 


The—tree grows in a moist soil, 

—iree is good for constructing beds and seats... 

—tree destroys one’s enemies. 

—tree corresponds to one of the eight quarters 
in a query or omen. 

There will be good rain, if a crow caws 
sitting on an—tree. 


—tree is good for images and bestows prosperity 


on the Sudras. a 
ARJUNAYANA—The King of—will meet with 
destruction if, 
In the north of Bharatavarsha lie the—s._... 
The-—s belong to Jupiter isi 
When Jupiter is vanquished by Venus, the 
—s will suffer. 
ARKA TREE—as tooth stick bestows good 
brilliance. 
ARKA PLANT—Increase of gold is indicated 
by the— Se 
Ungent prepared with the milky juice of the—.., 
ARM.~—People to suffer on account of clash of—s, 
Little clash of—s. 
—gs belong to the masculine limbs. 
Effect of pimples on the— 
Deities on the left—of the HousemGod 
The length of the—and fore—of an idol. 
The circumference of the— 
Kings have-—s like the trunks of elephants, 
Kings have longs. 
—-s of the Hamsa type of men. 
—s of the Malavya type of men. 
—s of the Bhadra class of men, 
Love is indicated by exposing the—s, 
Omen causing clash of — 
Effect of a dog smelling both the—s. 
ARMLET. 


oa 


XRIX—11 
LV—10 
LXXIX-—2 
LXXXV—6 


1 LXXXVI—80 


XCV—16 
LIX—6 


XI—59 
XIV—25 
XVI—-22 


XVII—19 


LXXXV—3 


XXIX—10 
L—25 
VII-—-3 
XXXIV—10 
LI—10 
LII—5 
LITI—54 
LVIII-—-25 
LVITI—26 
LXVIII—35 
LXVIII—88 
LXIX—7 
LXIX—10 
LXIX—13 


.» LXXVITI—3 
LAXXVII—30, 32, 43 
.» LXXXIX——13 


XLIWI—45 


INDEX 13 


ARMOU R—Storing-—-s when the Sun is in Simha. XLII—6 
ARMOURY—Places where—is kept will not be 


suitable for a query. ” i—5 
ARMPITS.—are masculine limbs. se LI—8 
Pimples on the two—. = LII—4 
Idol’s— » LVIII—24, 26 
men with—not perspiring, «» LXVITI~33 
men to have raised -- . DLXVITI--&6 
ARMY. es XLIV—z20 
Lands for the location of the— ii II—(15) 
Mobilisation of the— ite IV—10 
Disaffection in the King’s— ve V—89 
Annihilation of the— sé XXX~—-3 
Flock of deer to the right or left of an— Sai XXXKX—4 
Ruin or prosperity of an— eK KKAH 25, 28 
When a meteor approaches an— we «= AXXITI— 30 
Danger to the commander af an— AXXIV—10, 13 
Mutiny in the-— .. XXXIV—20 
Shattering and destruction of the King’s— ... XLITI-—-22 
One whose—consists of soldiers in a jolly mood. XLIV—28 
Devastation of the country by a hostile —... XLVI—82 
Clash of—ies. ~~» XLVII—16 
King’s —to be completely routed. we => RL VII—25 
-—similar to an aerial city. .» ALVII—26 
Leading to the command of an — .. DUXVITI-—-58 
A commander of—ies. ah LXIX—20 
Omen in a marching— .w. LXAAXVI—11 
Fleeing and destruction of an— so XCIV—9 
Crows perched on something pertaining to an— 
relate to battle. ot XCV—11 
If crows enter an-— as XCV—46 
AROHA—One of the 10 varieties of soipses. ae V—43 
AROHANA bie V—-49 
ARRACK—Distress to distillers of — as IX—34 
ARREST —Pimples causing— ses LI—5 
ARRIVAL—of an eminent personage ae XCVI---10 


ARROGANCE—producgs repulsion aa LXXV—6 


14 INDEX 


t 


ARROGANT FELLOWS. sis XVI—13 
ARROW-—One of the 8 arms of an idol of Vishnu 
should have an-— aa LVIII--33 
Goddess Ekanamsa should have an —in one 
of her 8 arms. es LVITI—~39 
Damsels having the.marks of an--on their 
soles or palms. ) eet LXX-=10 
ARSENALS. os LIII—16 
ARSENIC. ne XLIV-—9 
ARTISAN—Distress to—s. ve wW--29 
—s are assigned to Punarvasu. me XV--5, 11 
Mercury presides over—s. sts XVI--19 
One has to know-—s from saffron, . sae XXTX—--9 
—will suffer. Pr, ?, 0.40 Cow 
ARTIST—Distress to—s. ane V-—-29 
Eclipse in Chaitra will make-—s suffer. at V~—-74 
Venus in Hasta will make-—s suffer. ae IX—30 
—gs are assigned to Purvaphaleuni. sea XV—9 
Trouble to—s «= AXAXITI--19 
Danger from-— +» LAXXVIT—43 
ARTISTES~—Trouble to— .. NXXITI--19 
ARUNA-—When darkness is just pietced by —’s rays. XII—16 
ARUNA KETUS. sae XI—24 
ARUNDHATEE. as XII—6 
ARYAMAN-is situated to the east of Brahman ... LIII-——46 
—is the presiding deity for Uttaraphalguni ... XCVIII—4 
is the lord of Taitila Karana. we C—I 
ARYA METRE. ne LIV—99 
ARYAVARTA. e V—67 
ASANA., ve TI—(15) 


The state of mustard is known from the—tree... XXIX—5 
—jis a tree recommended for the construction 


of beds. we = DLXXIX—2 
ASANI - -SXXITI—1,2,4 
ASCENDING NODE aan V—-15 
ASCETICS—will be ruined when. a 1X--43 


—are assigned to Swati. see XV—-13 


INDEX 13 
When Mercury is beaten by Mars,—will suffer. XVIIT—15 
Place occupied by —, unfavourable for a query. LI--5 
Effect when a querist looks at .n-- LI--20; 22 
, Houses of— LINI—16 
Sighting of an-— LXXXVII —9 
ASHADIIA--- Moon passing through the two-~s, ... IV=5 
An eclipse falling in the month of — Vey 
Moon’s conjunction with Rohini in the dark 
half of--- XXIV—4 
Moon's conjunction with — XXV—1, XAAVI—-12, 13; 
Moon’s conjunction with Swati in the month of-—- XXV—6 
Full moon in- XAXVI-—-1I1, 14, 155 XXVII-1, 6. 
Intercalary —- month. XXVI—11 
The asterism- appertains to the circle of Indra. AXXII—16 
Portents seen in XLVI—87 
ASHADIIA YEAR of Jupiter. VITI—~11 
ASHES—Effect of seeing a wagtail perched 
on a heap of-- XLV—9 
Ablution in a ground free from— XLVII~—16° 
A place covered with-is inauspicious for a query. LI—4 
If a querist be standing on-—, he will be afflicted 
with disease. LI—14 
A piece of earth having the colour of-—~—1s 
declared to be waterless. LIV--106 
A rock having the colour of --is without any 
water nearby. LIV—109 


Qmens stationed on ~bring about quarrels, ... LXXXVI—60 


If a dog hides eatables inside, there would 


shortly be an outbraak of fire, + LXXXIX—-13 

If a crow throws-~in a couch, XCV—12 
ASHTAKAVARGA. II—(14) 
ASHTAMIL. V-—~17 
ASHTASRI. LVI~18 
ASIKAS, ai I-56 
ASIMUSALA., oe vVI-—-5 
ASITA, XI—~1 


16 | INDEX 


ASLESHA~—The Sun’s eastern course began at 
one time from the latter half of— ste 
—-represents the heart of the Samvatsara purusha. 
Course of-—is in the Airavata road, 

Effect of Venus in-— soe 
Effect of Saturn in— 

Effect of--being eclipsed by a comet 

Kegious under the group commencing with—... 
Things assigned to— 

——belongs to the Outcasts. 

Embryo formed in—rains for many days. 
Quantity of rain in— 

—constitutes Varuna’s circle. 

Thieves will be troubled when—-is struck. 
Effect of a comet touching seis 
A new cloth if worn in— 

—malkts its effects felt on the same day. 

Effect of birth in— sae 
Karkataka contains the whole of—- 


ASMAKA-~s will suffer destruction when an eclipse 
occurs in Kanya. P 


People of—will be in distress. 

The -~s will be put to much suffering. 

The chief of the--s will die. 

In the north west of Bharata Varsha are the-s, 


Mars presides over people of — = 
The-—s will suffer. ies 
The-—s will be affected. _ 
ASMANTAKA TREE. ne 
ASOKA-—When a halo is of the colour of —flowers. 
A mock Sun of the colour of—blossom. 
When fire shows the hue of —flower. ia 
Ornament of the hue of the red—flower, 
-——trees should be planted. sie 


The banks of a tank must be shaded by-—trees, 


A diamond of the hue of—flower is presided 
over by Vayu. ee 


IlI—1 
VIII-—-19 
IxX-2 
IX—28 
Da a 
XI—56 
XIV—10 
XV-—-7 
XV-—-30 
XXI—29 
AXILI—8 
XXXII-—-20 


XXXITI—19 


XLVII-~-12 
LXXI-—3 
ACVII—14 
Cl==5 
CII--2 


V--39 
IX~-18 
TX-~27 


XI—54+; 55 


XIV—22 
XVI—11 
XVII—15 
XXXII~15 
LIV—43 
XXXIV—6 


XXXKVII—2 


XLUI-~—-33 
XLITI—42 
LIlI--87 
LIV--119 


LXXX—10 


INDEX 17 


ASPECTS—Effects of planetary— = II—(14) 
To ward off evil effects of malefic— sei CIV—48 
Neutralisation of—-when ne CIV-——-52 

ASRUMUKHA. sai ViI—2 

ASS—Ulkas resembling--es. sa SSSIT9 


ASSEMBLY—To Anuradha is assigned delighting in~-ies, XV——15 
Omens to be considered with respect to the 


chieftain of an-—— ee LXXXVI—I11 
ASSOCIATIONS.—When Saturn is in Jyeshta, 
—come to grief, oie " X—I13 


In Vanik Karana, it is auspicious for trading,—, etc.. C—+ 
ASTAGIRI.—The—is situated to the west of 


Bharatavarsha. we XIV—20 

ASTERISM.—All abouts are treated in Yatra. ... II—(15) 
Sun with a slit in his disc and occupying at the time the 

natal—of a king indicates his destruction. IlI-—29 

Eclipses occurring in any of the—s sue V—42 

—occupied by Jupiter. ies VITI—1 

A year is composed of twos. a Vilil—2 

Jupiter is beneficent when he transits 2—s in a year. VIII—16 

-——s: Northern, Central and Southern. dang IX-—5 


Celestial Ketus are those that are seen among thes, XI-—~4 
When groups of-—s beginning with Krittika are hurt XIV-—-32 
When planets come tegether in any— ‘a8 XX—4 
Foetus born during the Moon’s stay in a particular— XXI—7 
An-~-at which an embryo is formed if afflicted by a 


malefic planet. sae XXI-—-33 
Quantity of rain should be euaged on the day of 

the—during which there is rain. Leis XXAITI~-3 
If no rain in any of the —-s beginning with 

Purvashadha, see XXITI“-S5 
If an—be afflicted by the Sun, Saturn or Ketu, AALII--10 
A diagram of the planets and the—s, soe XXIV—6 
One should ascertain the direction of the wind . 


at the Moon’s conjunction with the... XXIV—9 
‘Moon cutting across the prominent—of a group, XXIV—34 
‘ An-—having got an jpcependent halo aroundit. XXXIV-—18 

B.S, 3. 


18 : INDEX 


For making Indra's banner the astrologer and carpenter 

should proceed to the forest at an auspicious~-XLITI-—12 
Unnatural behaviour of—s. ie XLVI-4 
The-—of probable time of deivery of a pregnant woman 

will correspond to the particular limb touched 


by her at a query. wes LI-—43 
The--s propitious for sinking wells, ‘us LIV—123 
The-~-s favourable for the planting of trees. ... LV--31 
Effect of an—-on marriage. «. XCVITI-~-3 
In Godhuli lagna, it is unnecessary to consider the—, 
Tithi, etc ey CIII-—-13 
ASTHMA—To suffer from-—— a VIlI—48 
When Venus is of green colour,—will prevail... IX—44 
ASTRINGENT—If the querist hiccoughs, it has to be 
inferred that he has eaten something-—— Ase LI—32 
A copper-coloured earth mixed with gravel yields 
water of an-—taste. fe LIV—104 
ASTROLOGER. 
Aphorisms relating to an— a II—(1) 
Qualifications for an— we = sd ==(2) 
Qualities of an— so II—(3) 


The—should be conversant with II—(4), (5), (6), (7), (8) 
(9), (10), (11), (12). 


Who is a true—? ioe Il—(13) 
The predictions of a true—will never prove void 

of effect. sol [—3; XXI—3 
An—in the employ of a King. ek Ii—(18) 
Anis essential toa King. ww» II-8, 9, 10 
One should avoid a place where there is nom ... II—11 
Importance of an—of Brahmin origin. se II—14 
—s are assigned to Krittika. su XV—1 


The royal—should give an ablution to the King 
on a day with the asterism of Pushya, ...° XLVIII-—3 


The royal—should set out at night. ve KLVITI-~--18 
The-—should tell the auguries of Fire, wwe SLVILI--78 
The duty of an—at a query. | ee O oad | 


An~will always be honoured. TC © Conc 


INDEX 19 


Houses for royal—s. ° * LIII—10 

Honouring the— ses LX-~-18 

A clever—reveals the past and the future. ... LXVIII—1 
ASTROLOGY-~—The science of-—is contained in this 


Samhita. eae CVI—1 
ASTTHI KETU. dea XI-30 
ASURA—Name of one of the deities, sae LITI—44 
ASWAGANDHA. ... LXXVI-—-9 
ASW AKARNA—The price of horses should be 

determined from the— soe XXIX--7 

The existence of an—tree indicates that water 

is far off. — LIV—105 

Dignity will result from the use of— we «=LXXXV—7 
ASW ARAKSHA, wee LX XKXVI—-33 
ASW ATTHA—belongs to the central region of 

Bharatavarsha. ee XIV—3 

The success of all crops should be guessed 

through the—tree. a XXIX-—3 

—is One of the sacrificial twigs required. we. weilV—1Z 

Effect of an—tree in the corners of houses, ... LIII—85 

——bestows prosperity on the Kshatriyas. at LIX—5 


The image should be bathed with a decoction of — LX--8 
The genital organ of a woman being similar 


to the leaf of the—tree. Sea LXXK—3 
ASW AVADANAS. eee XIV-—-6 
ASWAYUJA—Solar or lunar eclipse in the lunar month of —-V—80 
Effect of Mercury being visible in the month of— VII—18 
Formation of clouds and fall of rain in the : 
month of— vee SKILL, 12 
The lustration ceremcny should be performed in— XLIV—2 
ASWAYDUJA YEAR. sed VIII-—-14 
ASWINI—When Mercury passes through— re VIiI—6 
~—belongs to the Go-veethi of Venus. ee 1xX-—2 
When Saturn passes through— “é x3 
To-~are assigned horse-dealers, esannenaane etc. XV—26 
belongs to the merchant class. we XV—29 
Quantity of rain in— 7 XXIII—~9 


‘—~belongs to. the cirge of the Wind-God. ... XXXII—8 


40 | INDER 


If—be struck, artists and artistes will be attacked. XXXII—19 


- ig favourable to the planting of trees. bas LV—31 
Wearing a new cloth in— we LXXI—I1 
Effect of birth in-- eae CI--1 
—is comprised in Aries. an CiIl—1 

ASWINS—The lords of the 11th Yuga in Jupiter’s 
cycle are the two— si VIII—23 
The presiding deities of Aswini are the .... XCVIII—4 
ATASEE—is to be determined from the flowers 
of Vetasa. iis XXIX—6 
Kanya presides over— ies ALI-~5 


ATASEE FLOWER-—If Saturn be deer-blue like the X--21 
The image of Vishnu to be made as dark as the-- LVIII—32 


A pearl dark like the— .. LXXXI-7 
ATASEE FRUIT. 3 LVII-—~3 
ATHARVA SIRAS. ws X&LVI—-73 
ATHARVA VEDA. ws MLVITI—71 
ATHIEST—A friend of—s .. S&LVI-—-76 

Kubja is an— .  LXIX-—35 
ATIBALA. eae LIV—50 
ATIMUKTA—From the——tree is known the state 

of cotton crop. se XXIX——5 

For making the wood-apple shoot, there is a 

combination of 8 roots one of which is—... LV—22 

Desired objects may be expected from— we ILXARV—5 
ATMOSPHERIC KETU. ‘ee XI-—-2, 4 
ATMOSPHERIC PHENOMENA, ww  SLVII—1 
ATMOSPHERIC PORTENT. XXI—2Z5; XLVI-—2, 4 
ATOM. . LVIII—I1, 2 
ATRI—One of the seven sages. a II—(18) 

—is situated to the west of Angiras. XIII—-5, XDLVIII—66 

——’s hermitage. or XIV—14 

Portents enunciated by— we ' MLVI-L 
ATTACK—Crows—ing people with their beaks, .. XCV—-9 

Success of--s when made during certain ; 

asterisms, we «=XCVILI—7 


ATTENDANT—To Aswini are iamenalee: “. dwae XV-~26 


SNDEX a 


Kubja is an-—of Harhsa, we = LXIX--35 
Mandalaka is an-—of Ruchaka. we =) L XIX 37 
AUSPICIOUS—~—Thamasakeelakas produce—effects when 
they enter the Moon’s orb. seit IlI—8 
Mars will prove—when oe VI—12 
Saturn is-—-when he is jet black. 52; X—21 
A comet whose crest has been hit by an Ulka 
will prove— oes XI~—61 
Teeth will be—when w. LXVIII—52 
The sound of a Jackal will prove—when re XC—-15 
AUSPICIOUS CEREMONIES. XVI—23, XCVIII~—10 
AUSPICIOUS FUNCTIONS.—A wagtail in—tends 
to prosperity. sate XLV—5 
AUSPKIOUS HOUSES from a Rasi. xs XLI~12 
AUSPICIOUS RITE. .. XLVIII—84 
AUTHORS.—To meet with— ee LXXXVII—11 
Danger from— eee L XXX VII—37 
AUTUMN.—The —shines like a smiling damsel. ... XTI—9 
To Anuradha belong all things that grow in— XV—15 
Shining like the Sun in— .. XLIW~66 
Portents auguring well in— .. XLVI-91 
The swan, cow and Krasuncha are of no 
consequence (for omens) in— ..LXXXVI-~27 
AUTUMNAL CREEPERS—Mithuna presides over— XLI~—3 
AUTUMNAL CROPS—will be abundant. ove IX—42 
-~will be affected. a X—18 
The—will not flourish. _ XxXV—2 
Enriched— wv. XXVIT—1 
Growth of — . XL—Il, 12 
Vrishabha presides over-— - XLI-—3 
AUTUMNAL SEASON. au V—78 
AVAHANA CEREMONY, .. XLVIII—19 
AVANTEE.—People of—will suffer. ... V—40, 64, 73 
AVAMARDANA. : V3, 48 
People of-—will be crushed. se IX—~-17 
People of—will be in distress. we IX-—-18, 21 


The King of—will,be destroyed. ae XIV—33 


22 | INDEX 


Dravyavardhana, ruler of— eos UXXXVI—-Z 
AVARJITA. is IV—-14 
AVARTAKAS. see AIV—12 
AVARTAKETU., XI—50 
AVERHOAS. ww. XXVIT—4 
AVERSION. we =>. UXXV—-5 
AXE.—creaking sound of the we §=6 XLITI—19 

Figure in the palm like an— LAVIII—47; LXIX—34 
AXLE. .. XLIII—-22 
AXLE PINS. we )=6 RLUII—22 
AYANA. ... II—(4), (8) 
AYANA VALANA., ius V—18 
AYODHYA.— The people of-—will suffer. Bee IV—24 

—belongs to the central region. ies XIV—4 
AYURDAYA. fe II—(14) 
AZURE STONE. we LXXX—5 

B 
BACK. The—is a neuter limb. : ae LI—9 
Pimples on the—cause the destruction of miseries. ‘LIY-—S5 
Hairy circles on the--are auspicious. .. LUXVI-—-3 


It is auspicious for men to have the—short, ... LXVITI—86 
The flaming of a horse’s—leads to the owner’s 

victory. we «6s MCIII—3 

BACK-BONE-—A tortoise that has a fine—is auspicious. LXIV—3 
Elephants having-—s similar to a bow and hips 


are called Bhadras. we «=.LXVII—I 
BAD TASTE. wwe = LIV—122 
BADARAS. ve | CUXIV19 
BADARAYANA. se XL—1 
BAHLEEKAS . eX VII-13, 25 
BAHUDHANYA. ee —- VILI-~33 


BAHUGIRI. oe &VI-26 


INDEX 23 
BAKULA.—tree should be planted amidst thorny trees. LIII—87 


BALA. | we LXXX—3 
BALABALA. LXXXVIII—36 
BALADEVA. LIV—125; LVIII—36 
BALADEVAPATTANA. ae XIV—16 
BALAKA., LXXVII—9, 28 
BALANCE, ww. ANVI—2, 9 
BALAVA. a C-—1, 2 
BALI, .. LVITI—-30 
BALHEEKAS~—tTrouble to the—is caused by 
Saturn in Magha. \ sey X-——7 
—-will be joyful when ww. NXVITI—6 
An earth-quake of the fire circle will affect the— XXXII-—15 
BALKH—The people of-—-will suffer. eis V-—37 
The Sun presides over— es XVI—1 
BAMBOO—Having the appearance of a cluster of—s. XI—26 
Meteor in the form of a-~cluster. we NXAITI[—27 
Indra gave a—flagstaff to the King of Chedi ... XLIII-—8 
Flags and discuses made of — wee «= MLV 4 
Swords shaped like a—leaf. ae L-—7 
Pearls are got from— . LXXXI—1, 28, 29 
The direction corresponding to-—tree. LXXXVI--80 
BAND. eter LXV—7 
BANDHUJEEVA—Abundance of coral should be 
inferred from the—flowers. wwe = MXIX—8 
Comets resembling—flower. a XI—11 
Lower lip similar to the—flower. bes LXX-—6 
BANDHUKA FLOWER, Pa, ©, ©, Goad fo 
BANNER—The Sun’s disc being obscured by an 
obstacle in the form of a-— sas III—18 
To Jupiter belongs—s, aa XVI—24 
Clouds having the shapes of a— Pr, ?.0, C4) 
Meteors that resemble—s, vee NMXXITI--10 
A meteor that has the appearance of Indra’s— XXXTII-—2+ 
An aérial city shining in the sky with—s. we XXXVI—5; 


SLITI—2, 5, 6, 7, 10, 11, 12, 14, 18, 35, 37, 38, 39, 41, 
45, 50, 51, 56, 59, 60, 61, 64, 67. 


da nde 


Planets stationed in the form of a— we XLVII-7 
The King should worship his— - XLVIN—73 
Men having the figures of a—become immensely 

wealthy: . LXVITI—48 
Damsels having the marks of—s. sue LXX—10 
A slit in the form of a— .. LXAI—13 


—s of certain colours are favourable to persons. LXXI[—4 

When cutting the tusk if the figure of a—appear LXXIX—2} 

The sign of the east is a— wee XXX VI—-78 

Dog passing yrine on a— ...LXXXIX—1 (a) 
BANYAN TREE. 

Barley should be guessed through the— ai XXIX—3 


Querist with the fruits of the—in his hand sie LI—17 
—produces unfavourable effects in the Western 
corner. ve LIII—85 


Where a—and a Pippala tree are together. ... LIV—96 
The banks of a tank should be shaded by— ... LIV—119 
One should drive a wedge of—at the place of 


the vein. oie LIV—124 
—-bestows prosperity. ws LXXXV--3 
The quarter represented by the— .-» LXXXVI—80 

BARBARAS. The—will be affected. Bee V—42 
The-are situated in the South west. vee XIV-—18 
BARBARIAN-—s will be destroyed, ae IX—40 
-——§ live in the west. 9% XLV—2E 
—s will come to grief. er A VII—~-16 
The-tribes belong to Rahu. ee XVI-—-35 
BARBER—When Saturn is in Hasta,—s will come to grief. X—9 
—gs are assigned to Krittika. me XV—I 
Unfavourable will be a place occupied bys fora query LI—5 
—’s wives serve as go-betweens, » LXXVIII—9 
BARDS~—The King should sit on the throne with— 
and Brahmins shouting. oo. XLVIII-—-49 
_ One coming in contact with— we LAXXVII—6 
BARHICHITRAKA. .. XLVII—1 
BARK~People clad in— sae AIV—31 


When dogs—continnously looking Up, towards : 
the heavens see SA VILI-1O 


INDEX 23, 


‘ 


When a querist looks at— sab LI-—-14. 
One ought not to use a tooth-stick that _ 

is without— we LXXXV-—-2 
If one or more dogs—at the Sun at Sunrise. ... LXXXIX—2 
If a dog—s in the S. E. corner .e LXXXIX—3 
A dog—ing at the Sun at Sunset we LXXXIX—4 
A dog—ing at the north at midnight vee LXXXIX—5 
If a dog standing on heaps of straw or tons of 

palaces—very loud ww. LXXXIX—6 


If a dog—s looking at the lady of the house ... LXXXIX—8 
If a dog—s facing a person desiring to undertake 


a journey. w+» LXXXIX—14 

If dogs bark repeatedly in a group in the middle 
of a village. .. LXXXIX—18 
BARLEY—The earth will abound in— oe VIII—30 
—is assigned to Pushya ee XV—6 
The Moon presides over— we xX VI—7 
The earth will be rich in— ere XIX—6 
Through the Banyan tree—should be guessed. XXIX—3 
from the Saptaparna rich growth of—is ascertained, XXIX—4 
Mesha presides over— see XLI-—2 
Vrishabha presides over— ce XLI-—3 
Tula presides over — oe XLI—5 
—preparations to be offered to fire. © ow.) CU XK LIV—11 
Tf the stalk of—has a branch or two wee SLVI-—-33 
Tf the querist touches his neck, his food has been of— LI-—-30 
A cock whose neck is of the shape of acorn. LXIII-—2 
Maiden whose feet contain marks of — see LXX—2 
A diamond having the form of acorn ee DLXXX-—10 
One will acquire— ». LXXXVII—4 
BARREN—ness of one’s journey. .» LXXXIX—16 
Rahu and Ketu make the girl— tag CIII-—9 
BARUKACHCHAS-—are situated to the South ... XIV—11 
The Moon presides over— ae XVI—6 
BASE MEN, es xX—3 
BASE-MINDED.” v VIII—12 


BASHFULNESS. we LXXVIII—12 
BBS, 4, 


26 INDEX 


BATH. vw ALVITI-72 
A shave soon after a—is not good. .» SXCVITI—13 
BATHE. ag XCV—16 
BATHS. se JI—(15) 
BATHING—Scents that become perfumes for— ... LXXVII—28 
—of a woman after her menses us EAS VELA 
BATTLE-—Baths for success in— Nes II—(15) 
A-~—will be impending. Se VIII—17 
Vidyadharas will be crushed in— es IX—27 
People and kings will be suffering from—s. ... x VI—41 
The country will be torn by many—s. a XIX—19 


Omens that have a ‘blasted’ position cause— LXXXVI—63 
Crows perched on something pertaining to the 


army indicate a— said XCV—11 
BAVA KARANA. C—1, 3 
BEAKS—Crows with their—raised indicate paeee 
to a traveller. aa XCV—11 
If a crow scratches with its—, a massacre of 
men is indicated. XCV—-31 
BEAMS—When the stars are pale and devoid = xII—7 
The thickness of the—- ise LITI—30 
The tips of the—should be laid in a direction from 
left to right. ws LXXIX—27 
BEANS. gee XVI--25 
BEAR—A dog having eyes like those of a— ies LXII—1 
The-—is strong in the South. ... LXXXVI~—21 
—gs are of no consequence in Hemanta we LXXXVI-—-28 
The cry and sight of the—are good but not the 
mention of their names, «ee LXXXVI—42 


BEARD—being smooth are of good augury. we )=©6 LX VIIL-—57 
BEASTS. If-—howl dreadfully at Sunrise or Sunset. IlI—38 


—are assigned to Mrigasira ie XV—3 
—-are assigned to Swati sae XV—13 
Cries of — sie AXIV—25 
Cries of—at dawn facing the Sun we KAXW-5, 30 
The effect caused by the cries of-—will be felt 

in a week. re XXX—~31 


_ The Asani falls upon— we ATT 4 


INDEX 27 


-——forming circles at dawn and twilight. seis XLVI—67 
A twilight resounding with the cries of—" .... XLVII—27 


Loss of-—with cloven hoofs. ww. «  LI—~16 
The nature of men resembles that of-—— «ss LXVITI—~—108 
——that have female names. we LXXXVI—38 
Omens caused by-~- ws LXXXVI—53 
One conversant with the cries of — se XCVI—1 
Effects of the cries of — sins XCVII~—7 
BEAUTY. ee LXXVIII—13 
BEDS—lInjuries to— bas I1--(18) 
Sparks observed in-—- ont XLVI—22 
Dogs barking standing on— vee LXANXNIX—20 
Crows striking the—with a gem. ae XCV—12 
BEE-HIVE—tTrees that contain— wae LIX—3 
Effect of — aie ACVII—8 
BEES—Sky covered with clouds resembling— _..... XIX-—-4 
Clouds dark as Tamala and the— 8 XXIV—17 
If honey-~cling to the banner wide XLITI—63 
Forests resounding with the notes of— we )=©60 MLVITI—5 
Clouds as dark as— «» NAVIIT—15 
Clouds appearing like swarm of — wee) OMA ALI—~17 
A stone resembling— ee LIV—107 
A rock having the color of— si LIV—-109 
Trees in which-—have taken up their abode. .... DLXNAIX-~-3 
Diamonds showing scratches like— «es )§=60 L XX X-—-15 
Rubies showing the lustre of — ~. LXXXATI~1 
-—building their honey-combs inside a house ... xCV—58 
BEES WAX-—belongs to Jupiter. ‘i XVI—Z5 
The value of Brahmins, Kshatriyas should be 
determined by— — XXVI—8 
BELL-METAL—Vrischika presides over— eee XLI--6 
—is one of the constituents for Vajra Sanghata LVII—8 
BELLOWING. Cows—in panic. oe ACI—1 
BELLS—Banner bedecked with— sus XLIII~—7 
The sound of—and conch shells are strong 
in the north. 0 L XX VI-2Z3 


BELL-RINGERS—When Saturn is in Pushya, the— 
‘will come to grief. , ae X-—-6, 12 


rn 


28 inbkx 
BELLY—is one of the feminine limbs, LI-—8 
_. If at a query a woman touches the—  LI~-38 
Pimples appearing on the— LII—6 
When an idol is of a slender— LVITI—50 
A bull that has a white— LXI—7 
A bull that has a well-shaped— : LXI—10 
For a horse there are 2 hairy circles between 
the—and the navel. a LXVI—4 
The Manda class of elephant has a hanging—.... DLXVII-—2 
A man with an even—or a—resembling a pot... LXVIII-~-18 


People with folds on their— 


- LXVILI—24 


A woman with a hanging— ek LXX—20 
BELOVED—The Moon presides over—persons ... XVI—8 
Young women mentally go only to their—ones. LXXV—4 
Union with a-—person. XC—~15 
A woman to be a—of the husband. CIII—~10 
BENARES. ‘sie V-~69 
BENEFIC—Moon aspected by—s. . XXVITI—1, 19 
Strong—s in the auspicious houses from a Rasi. XLI-—-12 
Strong—s aspecting a Rasi. XLI—13 
The Moon aspected by and associated with-—s. XLII—14 


Kendra and Trikona houses are occupied bys, LXXVITI-——25 
BENEFIC PLANET. CIV 52 
BNEFICIAL—Mercury will prove—to the people when VII—20 


Jupiter will prove—when VITI—53 
BENEFICENT—A planet proves—when XVI—40 
BENEFIT—will accrue to the person when XC—13 
BENGAL GRAM-is assigned to Visakha XV—14 

Saturn presides over-— XVI—34 
BENZOIN. XVI-—-25 
BERYL—If Saturn be as bright as the— X21 


When the Sun possesses the lustreof—XXVIII—3; XXXVII—~—l1 
The abundance and cheapness of—should be inferred 


from Nandikavarta. NAITX-~8 

A twilight. having the hue of— es KAKA 20 
When the fire shows the hue cf— ALITI-~33 

-! A sword having the lustre of-— L-—22 


INPDER 29 
A stone or rock resembling—— - wee | * LIV—107 


Bulls with eyes hued like the—stone see LXI~—14 
A tortoise having the lustre of — bs LXIV--—3 
~~, one of the gems, ses LXXX-~-4 
. One will get— LX XAVII—10 
BESIEGING, ~ sue XCI—3 
BESTIAL NATURE, ... LXVITI—114 
BETEL. LXXVII-—35, 36, 37 
BHADRAPADA—Effect of an eclipse in see V—79 
Effects in the—year of Jupiter. a VITI-—-13 
Clouds formed in— wee XNI~10, 11 
Conditions when the month cannot be called—~... XXVII-~8 
Banner to be ushered on the 8th of — .. MLIUITI—23 
Animals of no consequence in— woe LXXXWVI--27 
BHADRA,. The-—s are situated to the East 
of Bharatavarsha. se XIV—7 
A variety of wagtails named— seh XLV—2 
—, a kind of herb .» NSLVITI—40 
A class of elephants are called—s. vo LXVII—1 
The colour of— cee LXVII—5 
—, one of the Mahapurusha yogas. = LXIX-—-2 
Height, extent etc. of the—type of men, ae LXIX—7 
Characteristics of the—type of men sale LXIX—13 
Age of the-—type of men. ate LXIX—19 


Vamanaka is a servant of the King of the—type. LXIX-~-32 
Pearls produced from the—class of elephants... LXXXI-—20 
—is the name given to one class of Tithis ... XCIX—2 


BHADRASWA. o IX—11 


BHAGA~-is the lord of the 12 th Yuga in Jupiter'scycle. VIITI—23 
—name of the presiding deity of Uttaraphalguni. KCVILI—+ 


BHAGANDARA., we «= LVITI--64 
BHAGAVATAS, wit LX~-19 
BHAGURI, Sage— ww. NLVIU—2 
BHAGURU., .. LXXXVI—1 
BHALLAS. _. 5 XIV—30 


BHALLATA., |. LIW—45; 50, 92 


30 INDEX 
BHALLATAKA—One should guess danger for 


men from— «. XXIX—Il 
—nuts. | we = XLIV-—5 
If-—-tree be covered with ant-hills, there will be 
water 3 cubits from there ss LIV—50 
—fruit oe LVII-—3 
BHANDEEKA. oo XXX VIII—7 
BHANDEERA. .» LXXXKV—6 
BHARADWAJA. Sage— -» LXXXVI—2 
—goat ». LAXXVI—41 
Sound of the— . LXXXVII—15 
BHARANI—Mercury cutting through— sais VII—5 
The course is known as Prakrita when Mercury 
passes through— ey VII—9 
The course of Venus through— me IX—2Z 
The 9 stars from—onwards constitute the northern 
course of Venus. ve IX—6 
The 4 stars commencing from-—constitute the first 
cycle of Venus. sine IX—10 
Jn-—-, Venus causes damage to Kiratas and Yavanas. IX—35 
Saturn passing through— aie X—l, 3 
If—be dimmed or touched by a malign planet. XI—54 
To--are assigned ee XV—--27 
—belongs to the outcasts. ei XV—30 
Rain in— ‘hie AXXITI—7 
—belongs to the ‘Fire’ circle. we = =XXXII—~—12 
When-—is struck, ‘ XAXAXLII—~-19 
Wearing a new cloth in— are LXXI—1 
Birth in— oe CI—1 
Aries comprises— bas Cil—1 
BHARATAS. ins XVI—21 
BHARATAVARSHA. sis AIV—Il 
BHASAPARA, sae XVI—11 
BHASHA. «-LXXXVITI—4 
BHASHAKA, os LXXXVI—38 
BHAVA. oh VITI—31 


BHAVAKETU. : 7 XI—47 


INDEX 3) 
BHE BHE he XC—13 


BHEDA. i a II—(8) 
—(cleaving). Ses XVII—3 
BHEEMARATA. ae XVI—9 
BHIKSHU. .» LXXXVI—30 
BHOGAPRASTTHA. is XIV-—-25 
BHRIGU, we X&LVITI—64 
BHRINGA. aa LII-—€3 
BHRINGARA. we LXXKVITI—6 
BHRINGARAJA. ... LITI—44, 56 
BHKiNGEES, sae IV-—-22 
BHRISA. LIII—43, 52, 56 
BHU. an C—1 
BHUJAGA., ve LUI—45 
BHURJAKANTAKAS, a LIW—15 
BHUTAPURA aia XIV-—27 
BIG TOE, .eLeVITI—19, 20 
BILE, si IX—43 
BILWA—Meteor resembling—trees we AXXITTI—10 
—Fruits, XLVIII—42, LVII-~3 
—tree LIV—18, 50, 76, 105; LVI—15; LIX—5; 
LXX—10; LXXI—13; LXXIX—21; LXXXV-—3, 5; 
LXXXVI--80 
—kernel aoe LVII—5 
BIMBA FRUIT. LXVIII-—51; LXX--6 
BIRCH BARK. ses LI—14 
BIRD—Clonds taking the form of a— sae Iltl—35 
—s will suffer. V—55; IX—30; XVIIT—25, 26 
Crops will be affected bys. ve VIitI-—+4 
—-s will suffer destruction. — X-—20 
—s gre assigned to Mrigasiras, owe XV—3 
Coloured—s belong to Venus. sae XVI--29 
If the cries of—s be pleasant. XXII~-6, XX1V—12, 25 
——s bathe in water or dust. ee XXVITI—13 
Effects of Juncture are to be determined from——s. XXX—-Z 
Cries of—s at daw sis XXX—5 


Throwing down—¢ from the sky. ee XXX—6 


If—~s send forth their melodious notes. ae. >.0,. cy 
Attended with the cries of—s. we = XXXIV—8, 
‘Harsh cries of—s facing the Sun. ww. XXXIX—I 


If carnivorous—s follow the army of a king, .... XLVII-—25 
A twilight resounding with the cries of—s. .... XLVII-—27 
Trees in which bees and—s have taken up their 


abode. ee LXXIX—3 
—s having female names. ee LAXXVI—38 
An odd number of-—s. ws LAXX VI--43 
“Omen gate’ is caused by—®. . LXXXVI—53. 
One conversant with the cries of — i XCVI—1 
Effects of the cries of——s. we SCVII—7 
BIRD’S NESTS. we = NLITI-—~14 
BIRD'S. MEAT. dex LI—33 
BIRTH... sd 11—(14) 
Omens should also be considered at the fae of a XLIII—37 
Wonderful—s . XLVI~-95 
—of a boy or girl. sie LI—36 
One's previous— . IX VITI—-103 
—of a male, female or a hermaphrodite. va, ARV] 
—of long-lived children. wee N NS VILI—23 
BISONS. we =r SALV—15 
BIT. 23 XNCITI-—9 
BITCH~—With 5 nails on each foot. as LAI—1 
Effect of —es bringing forth their young ones in 
a forest. we aACVIT—8§ 
BITTER SUBSTANCES. i AVI-—-20 
BITTER THINGS. 5s XVI—-34 
BLACK ANIMALS. “a “RXIV—35 
BLACK AND WHITE, we = SALV—35 
BLACK FROG, ; ste LIV—18 
BLACK GRAIN,—s will be destroyed re IX—40 
BLACK GRAM-is assigned to Visakha. — XV—14 
—belongs to Rahu. ae XVI—-37 
—will thrive nae XXV—2 
—is ascertained from the Jamboo fruits . KXIX—4 


Kanya presides over— . 3 Sis XLI~—5 


INDEX 33 


One must have eaten-—when : ss LI—31 
Six morsels of—boiled in milk. we §=©6h LX XVI—-4 
—soup. . LXXVI—-8 
One will obtain—when soo LsKAX VII--22 
One will eat food prepared from— Se XCV—22 
BLACK GUMS~—in a female lead to thievishness. LXX—2l 
BLACK MAGIC. Hymns used in-— se XLIV—21 
Clever in spells and— be% LXIX—30 
Expert in ais LXIX—37 
BLANKETS—tTo buy and sell— se XLIT—8 
One will get—if woe LXXAVIT-—-12 
BLASTED OMENS. we LXXXVI—15 
BLASTED QUARTER, ww. LUXXXVI-15 
BLAZING. Metor falls:— we «6 MA NITI—30 
The--of a sword. ae XLVI—23 
and explosion without fire ot XLVI—86 
if a jackal is—, the country will be destroyed. XC—6 
BLEAT. sett LXV—10 
BLEED. ee XCV—30 
BLEMISHES, we LXXIX—32 
BLEST. -» LXVIII—-116 
BLIND-—When the eyes of the idol are turned upwards 
the sculptor will become— - LVIII—52 
One to become— ahs XCVI—12 
BLISS. sue LXXIV—18 
BLOOD.—Comets resembling— aa xXI—~11 
Those that feed on— aa XV-—-27 
The earth to be filled with— ea XXVII-—5 
If-—flows from trees, there will be war. _... XLVI --27 
If there be a rain of—, there will be war. ... XLVI—40, 43 
A sword with the smell of — de Lj=-22 
A drink of—by the sword sis L235 
—, one of the 7 vital substances in the body of 
living beings. ..  LXVIII-96 
One to have—in abundance. ee LXVITI—97 
One to have flesh and—of the best quality ... LXIX-——28 
—in @ woman. LXXVIN—16, 17 


B.S. 5. 


34 INDEX 


Omen causing flow of— w» LXXXVII—-35 
Admixture of—in one’S family we =>@. LXXXIX—1 
To have one’sspilt. ‘ns XCV—48 
BLOOD-LIKE. ae XLVII—27 
BLOOD-RED. ee IlI--24 
BLOOD-SHED. as V—26 
BLOOD-STONE. “ite LXXX—4 
BLOOD-SUCKER-—The sight of ain front ... LXXXVI—41 
BLOWS—Pimples on the neck produce— ve LII-—4 
One will get—if LXXXIX—1 (c), XCV—55 
BLUE FLIES. ~ XCV—58 
BLUE GEM. bs LIV—110 
BLUE JAY—Clouds showing the,colour of-—s. XXVITI—14 
A halo shining like— she XXXIV—4 
—s sitting on the banner. sae XLIU—62 
a forest resounding with the notes of—s. ... XLVITI—6 
—is strong in the north. wv» LXXXVI—23 
—flying from left to right. . LXXXVIII—23 

A traveller to whose right a—flies will saftat 
death. . LXXXVIII—24 


Sight of a—is always favourable to a peiedliee LXXXVIII--25 
BLUE LILY—One has to know the minister from—ies. XXIX-—-9 


A twilight having the hue of a— ies XXX-—-20 
Huge clouds resembling— re XXXII—21 
When the fire shows the hue of — — XLIII—33 
A wag tail on amtends to prosperity re « XLV—6 
A sword shaped like-——petal. 3 *L=7 
An eye defeating the lustre of the petal se a LXX--7 
BLUE SAREE. we) «=LXXXVI-79 
BLUE SNAKE. a LIV—46 
BLUISH ASOKA. - XXIX—2 
BOAR—s will be destroyed. ies TX—40 
Meteors resembling— fia XXXIN--9 
The Great— ‘as XLIII-—54 
Having a face similar to a— we LXVIII—104 
Pearls got from——s, w» LXXXI-29 


The-—should not be considered in Bhadrapada. LXXXVI-—-27 


INDEX 35 


The mention of-—is not good. we LXXXVI—-42 
BOAR-HUNTERS. ve XV—22 
BOAR’S TU6KS. »»  LXXXI—-23 
BOAT. os IV—8 
BODY. The throbbing of the— ae IT—(15) 

Cows with weak— ce LXI~—4 

Constituent elements of the— $3 II—(14) 

A hen with a glossy— ve LXIII—3 

A tortoise that has a pot-like— Ses LXIV—1 

—jily lustre, .« LXVIITI-g9 
BOILED RICE. a LI—30 
BOILS.—on the right half of the body ses LII—9 
BOLT. XXX—~-30, 31, 33 

A line of clouds across the Sun is called ...XLVII—19, 23 
BONE—The earth will be strewn with pieces of—s IX—25 

If wag tail is seen perched on— ~ XLV-—-9 

If there be a rain of—s vig XLVI—40 

When dogs bring—s into houses, ae XLVI—71 

A ground free from ashes and —s ». SLVITI—16 

—belongs to the masculine limbs gue LI—8 

When a querist is standing on— ote LI—14 

Sight of— re LI—29 

If the thorn is made of — aie LIII—60 

—one of the 7 vital substances of living beings LXVIII—96 

One who has thick--s ..»  LXVIII--99 

If a dog passes urine on a— » DLXXXIX—1 

If a dog hides—s. .» LXXXIX—13 

If a crow throws—s ite XCV—12 

If a crow is breaking a— a XCV—39 

If a crow caws holding in its mouth a— set XCV—40 


BOOK—The Goddess Ekanamsa has a—in her left hand. LVIII—38 
One will get—s or have contact with—sellers. LXXXVII—11 


Danger from—s or-sellers, we LXXXVII--37 
BOON—Brahma conferred a—on Rahu. es V—14 
to the suppliants, es LVIII-—39 
BORDERS. sa LXXI—11 


BIORING,. “eee C—6 


36: INDEX 
BOSOM. A woman’s— Se LXX-—5 


Exposing of thes, .»  DUXXVIII—3 
BOTTOM. | cae L~8 
BOW. Configuration of a— a3 IV—12 

Armament of—s. ae xIX-~3 


One of the left hands of lord Vishnu should have a—LVII[——-33 
In one of the left hands, Goddess Ekanamsa has a — LVIII—39 


Pradyumna has a—in his hand. se LVIII—40 
Siva has a-called Pinaka in his hands... LVIII—43 

@ Men with figures like a— LXVIII—47; LXIX—29 
BOW-MAKERS. see V—73 
BOY S—will perish des V—65 
To Purvaphalguni are assigned— ee XV—9 
Mars presides over— ae XVI—14 
Fire in the south-east farebodes evil to— ... XXXI—3 
Mars inside a halo causes misery to— see XXXIV—13 
If—clap their hands, sas XLITII—28 
Any unnatural feature in the figures of— XLVI—13 
The place where—strike one another see XLVI—77 
Subrahmanya should be a— os LVOI—41 
BRACKISH WATER. ... LIV—22, 104 
BRAHMA. I—4, 5, 6; V-—-2, 14, 19; XCVITI—5 
BRAHMA DANDA. 5s XI—15 
BRAHMA GEM. ve LXXX%—5 
BRAHMA LOKA. IJ-—12; LXXIV—18, 19 
BRAHMAN. Son of— re AI~15 
' 8 Ketus born of— es XI—-25 
Daughter of— ie XXVI—5 
Temple of— .- MXXITI—-22 
Rays produced by—. see XXXIV-—Z 
—gave a girdle af many colours. is XLITI—42 
Hymns addressed to—- us XLIV~6 


Any unnatural behaviour in the image of— ... XLVI—10; 
ALVIN-—-55; LITI--—47, 54, 66 

The idol of—should have four faces. ve LVUI—41 

' The installing priests of-— ae LX—~19 

One should worship— seks RXKVELEH4O 


INDEX 37 


—is the lord of the first lunar day, os XCIX—1 
—is the lord of Balava Karana, ee C—1 
BRAHMAPURA. ies XIV-~—30 
BRAHMA SIDDHANTA., as II—(4) 
BRAHMIN CLASS. VITI—52; IX—12; XV-—28 
BRAHMIN COMMUNITY. see IV-—23 
BRAHMINS —will rise to power, Ss IV—31 
Prosperity for— ead V—z20 
—-will suffer, V-~28, 53; VIII-—42; X—-16, 17-19 
Rahu will kill the— “ae V—32 
Trouble to the— srt V—71, 72 
—will suffer destruction. oo V—76 
The—will perform many sacrifices ies V—-98 
promotes happiness of— bes IX—-16 
To atone the murder of a— ia IX—25 
—will neglect their religious duties sae IX —39 
—-will suffer ruin. ee IX—42 
Saturn proves destructive to— ae X—Z21 
—making offerings to Agasthya ea XII—19 
—belong to Angiras. ss XIII-—~10 
~~are assigned to Krittika aes xV—1 
a - Uttarabhadra me XV—24 
The Moon presides over— oss XVI—7 
Discord between-—and Kshatriyas. oe XVIE—21 
—will thrive aus XVITI—4 
A--should worship fire. ee XXIV—7 
The value of— is measured by bees wax. ... XXVI-—8 
—are indicated by lotuses. aa XXIX—10 
Danda forebodes evil to-—- er XKX— 16 
Fire seen in the north forebodes evil t¢ the... XXXI—4 
A white meteor ruins— we = XXXITI—14 
A rough meteor falling in the north bodes 

evil to— ee = XXXITI—15 

If Pushya, Swati and Sravana be struck, there 
will be trouble to— we «© xKXXITI-—-18 


A meteor falling om the bolt of a door causes 
trouble to— we «= MXXITI-~-22 


. £ INDEX 


‘ Ahalo on the first day of a lunar month will 


destroy— we) UKM KIV—1O 
| At night, the rainbow causes suffering to— ... XXXV—8 
_ An aerial city with white, red, yellow or dark 
colours annihilates the— wi XXXVI—1 
Thunder in the 2nd watch destroys— ea XXXIX—-3 
If portents are observed in the north,—will suffer. XLITI—65 
Wagtail near—tends to prosperity. Led XLV—5 
Unnatural behaviour observed in the images 
bodes evil to— ae XLVI—10 
The field should be made over to— aoe XLVI—37 
The owner should worship— XLVI—58, 59, 65 
During portents of beasts, birds, etc., 5—should 
repeat hymns, au XLVI~—72 
If two Moon’s shine in the sky,-~will soon prosper. XLVII—11 
The king should worship ..  X&LVIII--73 
The houses of— .» LIII—13, 18 
For —, breadth of houses in cubits. we =e) 6 LITI~25 
Divisions of deities to be allotted to— oes LIII—69 
A slope to the north is auspicious to-—— ian LIII—91 
Wood that is good for images that are installed by— LIX—5 
Honouring of— “es LX-—17 
Adepts in the rights of Brahman are known as— LX—19 
A bull with cat’s eyes is not good for— 5s LXI—6, 8 
Murder of a— oe LXVIII-—3 
One in whom the quality of —predominates ... LXIX~—-8 
Oneydevoted to-— .« LXIX,..29, 38 
Wearing of new cloths with the consent of — LXXI—8 
Yellow colour is favourable to— ar LXXII—4 
Umbrella of—should be circular. ss LXXIII—6 
| —are pure at the feet. ..  LXXIV~—8 
White diamond is auspicious for— nia LXXX—11 
' Omens situated in the abodes of—are auspicious. LXXXVI—17 
The quarter owned by— » LXXXVI—34 
'-A—mioving in the north is auspicious. oe LXXXVI~45 
One will meet a— LXXXVII—-3, 14 


.. Trouble.from Vratya— oe LXXXVII—39 


INDEX 


Trouble to the— LXXXVII—45; 


A-~in the neighbourhood of a horse brings victory. 


Sudras will come in contact with— 


Portents to be warded off by expiatory ceremonies 


performed by— 


68 


LXXXIX—5 


XCIII-—-8 
XCV—54 


XCVII—17 


One should do in Balava things that are beneficial to—- C—3 


In Chathushpada Karana things relating to— 
become fruitful. 


Gifts to a astrologer. 
BRAID. ss 
BRANDISH. vee 
BRAMHKE. 
BREACH—The splitting of the earth without — ... 
A sword that has a— 
BREAK—If both the tusks— 
Elephant, to—the middle of ifs left tusk. 
A crow—ing a bone. 
BREAKING OF STONES. 
BREATH. 
BREATHING. 
BREAST—is one of the masculine limbs, 


Pimples on the--lead to the acquisition of a son. 


Prithvidhara is on the left—of the House-God. 

Aryama is on the—of the House-God. 

The Sun-God’s—should be elevated. 

The groups of Mothers must have charming——s 

A bull having—full of veins 

A bull having strong— 

A bull baving narrow groins and— , 

A horse has two hairy-circles on the— 

The elephant of the Manda class has a slack — 

It is laudable for men to have broad— 

The Bhadra class man has large— 

A woman with tender—and without hair, ... 

A woman with two big —produce misery. 

Smoke in the—of a horse leads to defeat. 
BREEZE, 


Cc=5 
CV—7 
LI—40 
L--6 


XLVII—41 


XLVI--75 
L—4 
XCIV—10 
XCIV—11 
xCV—39 
LIV—113 
LXI—12 
XCIV—12 
LI-—8 
Lil—4 
LIYI—-52 
LIII—51 
LVIII—46 
LVIlI—56 
LXI—5 
LXI—11 
LXI—16 
LXVI—4 
LAVII—2 


LAVIII—85 


LXIX—14 
LXX—5 


| UXX—21 


XCIII—3 


ae REVIT7, 9 


46 | INDEX 


A cool-—blowing from the east. XXVITI—12 
Impact of a gentle— XXX-—-7 
A twilight having gentle— : XLVII—27 
BRICKS-——The wall of all houses made of burnt— LIVI—23 
Dog passing urine on a heap of— LXXXIX—1 
BRIDES. +. XVI~-28 
BRIDE-GROOMS. ee XVI—28 
BRIDGES—To Purvashadha are assigned con- 
structors of— ‘i XV—18 
Mercury presides over XVI--17 
People that live near— XIX—12 
Construction of—on the high roads by children. XXVIII—5 
BRIGHT GLARE. XLVI—8+¢ 
BRIHADRATHA. LXI—1 
BRIHASPATI—is the lord of one of the 12 Yugas. VIII--23 
As instructed by——to Narada. XXIV—2 
Hyngns addressed to— XLVII—77 
—tahght the royal ablution to Indra. XLVIII-—86 
BRIHATEE. LXXXV—5 
BRIHATKSHATA. w. LITI—44, 53 
BRILLIANCE.—at dawn and Sunset XLVI—75 
Arka bestows great LXXXV—3 
BRINJALS. LiIV—48 
BRISK. we LXVITI—115 
BROACH. we LXIX—l1 
BRONZE. XXVIII-—5 
BROTHER. LI—28 
BROTHER’S WIFE. LI~—28 
BROW-—“is one of the feminine limbs. ie LI--8 
The—s measure 10 digits from end to emi LVIII—12, 13 
Hairy circles near the—s of horses, jae LXVI-——3 
Lofty—s are the indications of short life. ww» LXVIII~—68 
A man of the Bhadra class has well-knit—s .... DLXIX—15 
A man of the Ruchaka type has beautiful--s.... LXIX—27 
Blessed are the—s that are se LXX~--8 


The eyes and the—s represent the 9th stage of life. LXX-—26 


BROWN STONE. 


LIV—44 


INDEX: 41 


BUBBLES. . LXXX-—-16 
BUCKLER. -- LVIII—33 
BUDDHIST MONK. gaan 
Mars presides over—~s sss XVI—15 
If-the querist sees a-~ : ees LI-—21 
There will be the sight of a-- we LXXXVII—9 
Fear from—s. +L XXX VII—-36 
BUDDHIST NUN. | w. LXXVITI—~9 
BUDDHA-should be represented as seated on a lotus. LVIII-—44 
The installing priests of—are known as Sakyas. LX--19 
BUFFALO.—s will be destroyed. sa IX—40 
Saturn presides over she-- see XVI—34 
Sign Vrishabha presides over— “ie XLI-—3 
Wagtail perched on a— ies XLV—9 
To eat the flesh of a— oes LI—34 
When one sees a— oe LI—19 


The God of Death should be mounted on a—... LVIII—~-57 
One is horoic when he has a neck like that of a—LXVII[-—3]1 


Face like that of a— .. DUXVITI—104 
With respect to omens,—are of no consequence 
in Hemanta. we DLXXXVI—28 
One will get— .. ULXXXVII—6 
If she— coming home with the cry of oe xCIiI—3 
If a crow caws sitting on a— ste XCV—35 
Sleshmataka seeds rubbed with—s’ dung. «.. LV—30 
-~’s hide ee LVII—7 
—’s horn LVII—7, XXXII—I17 
BULBS~-are assigned to Aslesha. ae XV—~7 
Karkataka presides over—— 25 XLI—4 
If-are kept for 2 years. ms XLIT—9 
If one collects--when the Sun is in Meena ... XLII—12 
BULL. To Rohini are assigned—s aos XV—2 
If-at the time of the cows returning home, a— 
takes the lead oes XXIV—35 
‘Increased lasciviousness on the part of—s._ ... XLVI—85 
Skin of a— XLVIII—43, 44 
The -ensign of Siva is a— we = LVILI~43 


B. & 6. 


42 INDEX 


A~is inauspicious when bet LXI-—5 

- A-that makes too much dung Get LXIl—7 

A—whose body is filled with dark spots sie LXI—s 

A—having weak neck ss LXI—9 

—gs having red lips etc., a3 LXI—10 

—gs with hairy circles turning left es LXI—13 

—s with eyes hued like the beryl-stone. sie LXI—14 
A—that has wrinkles on its snout, ian LXI--15 

One with a neck like that of a— .. LXVII~31 

Face resembling that of a— .» LXVILL—103 
The gait of kings resemble that of—s, we LXVIL—115 

Feet and palms of the man of a Ruchaka type are 

marked with the figure of a-— ie LXIX—29 

One will obtain a— ... LXXXVII--22 

If a—cries at night, oe XCII-—2 

One will get—s. oF XCV— 24 

BULLOCK. Sign Vrishabha presides over-—s. ,.. XLI~—3 

BURDENS. Bearers of — ae V—42 

Bulls that cannot carry— aoe LXI~9 

A bull that is fit for— a LXI—16 

BURD WANs to the east of Bharata-Varsha ... XIV—-7 

The Sun presides over— -_ XVI—3 

BURGLARY. .. LXXXIX—9 

BURIAL GROUND. A wagtail perched on—... XLV—9 

——jg inauspicious, oe LI—4 

Trees growing ons we = LXXIX—3 

—is the sign of the southern quarter. .» LXXXVI—78 
BURNING. an XcCI—1 


BURNING QUARTER. Omens occurring in the- LXXXVI— 
13, 57, 59, 71; LXXXVITI—29 


jackal in the— XC—3 
Crow standing in a— wens XCV~18 
Effects in— as XCVII—~5 
BURNT. = XCV—~36 
BURROW~-DWELLERS, ve LXXXVI—~-28 
BURROWING. XClI—] 


BUSHES. When—are fully packed with glossy ieavea XXIX—14 


INDEX 43 


Ground devoid of— — LIV—90 
If an elephant breaks— bes XCIV—13 
If a crow builds his nest on— ts XCV—5 
BUSINESS. wie ¥xCV—36 
BUTCHERS. Release the animals from the hands 
of-— ». XLVITI—81 
Places occupied by— siete LI—5 
BUTTER.—Pearls from Surashtra are hued like— LXXXI—4 
A vessel filled with clarified— ies CV-—7 
BUTTER-MILK—Kept for 7 nights. ai LIV—114 
A mixture of Ajamoda, rock salt, etc., soaked in—LXXVI—11 
BUTTOCKS. One of the feminine limbs. ei LI—8 
Pimples on the— aa LII—8 
Mriga is on the—of the House-God. ae LILI--57 
The group of Mothers must have large— .... LVIII—56 
Bulls that have small—— st LXI—10 
A man with very stout— .» LXVIII—17 
- To be afflicted with a fistula on the-— set LXIX—23 
A woman withhanging. sie LXX—20 
Diamonds that are like the— we LXXX—17 
BUXOM WOMAN. ..» LXXXVI—79 
C 
CALAMITY, A phenomenon boding— ‘he II—(18) 
Terrible—will befall mankind. ste X—19 
Mankind will be afflicted by various—ies, _... XIX-—-9 
When the Moon stands South-east of Rohini, 
there will be great-ies. Sue XXIV-~33 
To portend great-—to the king. A XXXI—2 
Great—is in store for the country, 55 XLVI—44 


If a house is filled with ant-hills, there will be—ies. LII1—89 
If blood comes out when cutting the tusk, there 

will be—to the people 6 DLXXIX--25 
If jackals cry like dhik, dhik, there will be great— XC—6§ 


“to the Town, | ae |) XCT— 2 


+4 " INDEX 


t 


If crow cries without any reason, there willbe § XCTII—2 
Terrible—ies due to,reversal of temperature etc., ‘XCVII—~5 


CALF. 

CALF-MUSCLES. 

CALVES. 

CAMEL-s will suffer. 
Saturn presides over—s. 
If the clouds have shapes of—s. 
Meteors resembling—s. 


If—s are bought in Kanya Masa and sold in 


the 6th month. 
A wagtail perched on a-—— 
If—s bring forth twins. 
A piece of earth having the colour of a-—— 
A rock that has the colour of a— 
A man with a waist like that of a— 


XLVI—56 
LXX—-17 
XLVIti-—11 
V—54 
XVI—34 
XXIV—21 
XXXITI-—9 


XLII-—-7 
XLV—9 
ALVI—53 
LIV—106 
LIV—109 
LXVITI—18 


Those who had in their previous birth face cael 


body like those of a~- 


. LXVITI--104 


For purposes of omens, ais to be known as of 


no consequence. 

Death of donkeys and— 

A crow standing on a— 
CAMEL’S MILK. 


CAMPHOR. Powder of—as a component of a 
perfume. LXXVII—11, 


Pearls sprung from bamboo resemble 
CANCER. 
CANES. 
CANOPIES. 
‘CANNIBALS. 
CANOPUS. 
(CAPTIVATY. 
(CARAVAN, 
CARCASS—eating bird. 
‘CARDAMOM. 
Heaps of ‘smail—s. 
~~s mixed with camphor powder 


.. LXXXVI—-26 
«LL XXXVIO—44 
XCV—47 

L—24 


12, 15, 16, 27 
LXXXI-—~28 

see CII—2 
LXXII—4 


a  DLXXII—4 


XIV—6 
II—(18) 
we LXXIX—28 
»-LXXXVII—-39 


idee L—3 


os XVI—-25 
. RKVII—4 
oe LXKVII—~12 


Imax ab 


CAR. ve XLVI-~-9 
CARNIVOROUS BEINGS—are assigned to Magha. ‘XV—8 

The sight of a— wee Li—33 
CARPENTER. XLITI-—12, 19, 22, 29; -L.£A—28; 


LXXXVII—20, .24 
CARRIAGE, If the Moon should appear like the 


yoke of a—— a IV—12 
When a-— moves without horses. .» ML VI—-60 
CART. The tree should be taken to the town-gate 
through— . MLIH—21 
When a wagtail is seen perched on a eae XLV—7 
CARTMEN—will suffer distress. re x—4 
To Rohini are assigned— = xXV—-2 
CART WRIGHT—s will suffer when Saturn is in 
Uttarabhadra. , ee X—17 
CASSIA LEAF. .. ‘LXEX—16 
CASTES. or }I—(14) 
Ruin of— we) MAXI 18 
Rough meteor bodes evil to the foar— .. XXXITI-1S 
Destruction of persons of mixed— we XXXVI—-2 
Pimples of the people of the 4— oT .LII—1 
CAT. When Saturn is in advance of Venus,—s will 
‘be -destrayed. ses IX—40 
-—~s scratching the earth wv. AXVITI—-5 
—gs are strong in the west. we LXXXVI—22 
All omens excepts cause famine. vee LXXXVI-—-65 
Effects due to the sight of sexual union of —s will 
come to pass in a month. we =) CVI 12 
CAT’S FACE, aan LXI~15 
CAT MEWING. ooo XXX VII 35 
SCCATARACTS, sc LVI-—-8 
CATCHERS. 4 XV—4, 27 
CATTLE, Disease will break out among— _... Iv—ll 
—wall prasper. oe V—-20 
~~will suffer. VIiIl—4; XVII—~26 
—will increase. oF IX-—-20 


will lauguish. ee XIX--2 


Rearing of—will thrive. 
The country will lose— 
Destruction of— 
Prosperity of— 
Evil to the— 
Trouble to one’s— 
To become owners of — 
Theft of one’s— 
CATTLE-LIFTING. 
CAUVERY. 
CAVES. Inhabitants of— 
—-a sign of one of the 8 quarters 


CAVE-MEN. Death overtakes the— 


—will thrive. 
Ketu presides over— 
CAVERNS. 


XIX—-10 
XIX--19 
XLVII—16 
XL—6 
XLVI-~-10 
LITI—60 
LXVIII--23; LXXIX—6 
we LXXXVII—39 

Le XXXIX—5, 9 
V====64 

XVI-—-35 

. LXXXVI-—-78 

[X—17 

IX-——21 

sae XVI—38 
XVI—17 


AXX-—-13; 


CAW. XCV—16, 17, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 
29, 30, 32, 34, 35, 36, 39, 40, 41, 42, 43, 45, 48, 50, 51 


CELESTIAL KETU. 
CELESTIAL NYMPHS. 
CELESTIAL PHENOMENA. 
CELESTIAL PORTENT. 
CELIBATE. 
CEMETERIES, Trees growing in— 
When dogs go tomand bark there 
CENTRAL ASTERISMS. 
CENTRAL COUNTRY. 
Men of—ies will be troubled. 
Trouble would befall the-— 
CENTRAL ROUTE. 
CENTRAL TRACTS. 
CEREBRAL DISEASE. 
CEREMONIAL FIRES. 
CEREMONY. 
CEYLON. 


XI—2Z, 4 
XLVI--90 
XLVII-—1 


XXI—-26; XLVI--2, 4, 6, 7 


ve LXXXVII—15 
XLIN—13;  LIX--2 
. LXXXIX—14 
IX—5, 6 

V—-90 

X—5 

XLVII—7 

we t”té‘<‘é«wM KR 
V—78 

LXXIX~-29 
II—(15) 
XLVIII—85; C~5 
LXXXI—3 


CHAIN, When a dog enters a house with a... LX XXIX—~1d 


If a crow caws holding a— 


“oes “XCV—42 


INDEX 47 


*HAITRA, If an eclipse happen in the month of—, V—74 
In the—year of Jupiter. ona VIlI-8 
Clouds formed in-— vas XXI—12 
Moon’s conjunction with Swati occurring in— XXV—6 
Portents in the month of— — XLVI—85 

~HAKORAS, ee XLVIII—6 

SHAKRA. ; se XX-—2 

“HALA KETU. re XI—33 

SHAMARA DEER. a LXxXII—1 

SHAMBER. ae LIII—118 

THAMELIONS. XXVIII--8; LXXIX—24 

SHAMPA. ee XVI—3 

SHAMPAKA FLOWERS. The cheapness of Gold 
should be inferred from— ae XXIX—8 
A sword having the smell of-—— Bee L-—21 
Hair oil of the scent of— »-LXXVII—6, 7 

CHAMBERLAINS. - XLITI—23 
Dimensions of the houses of — sei LII—8 

CHANCHU. .» LUXXXVITI—S5 

CHANCHUKAS. sid XIV—18 

CHANDALAS. sé V—28 

CHANDRAPURA. Sei XIV—5 

CHANDRABHAGA. ‘ies XVI—-27 

CHANDRA YOGAS. es II—(14) 

CHANGE OF PLACE. ee XCV—45 

CHANT OF VEDIC HYMNS. » LXXXVI—23 

CHANTERS OF VEDA. me V—74 

CHARACTER. One to possess a good— .- LXVITI-~-112 
Jupiter will give the girl a good— toe CIiI—1 

CHARACTERISTICS. sas Ti—(14) 
A person’s— sae LXIX—3 

CHARACTERLESS PEOPLE. sek XV—27 

CHARAKARANAS, a Cc—1 

CHARAKA PERFUME ses XVI-—-25 

CHARAKEE, ee LITI—83 

CHARCOAL, There will be— aoe XLV——1Z 


Figures drawn with— ee XLVI~7e 


4a oy 


A ground free from— .. XLVITIh& 
' A’ ground covered with— ae LI—-~4 
—direction. ww» LXXXVI—-13 
CHARIOT. To Venus belong—s. wv. | XVI-27 
Group of—s. ak XLITI—34 
Like'the wheel of a— we = XUTIT-—46 
One's hands and feet to be marked with the 

figures of—s, See LXIX—17: 
Damsels having marks of—s on their soles or palms.. LXX~—10 
CHARIOTEER.—s will be affected. i X-—-10 
—s.afe assigned ‘to Hasta, whe XV~—11 
Oue will meet a— ww. LXXKVIT—20 

CHARITABLE. To Uttaraphaiguni are assigned 
—persons. see XV—10 
To Dhanishta are assigned—persons, jes XV—21 
To Jupiter belong-—men. ee XVI—23 

CHARITABLY DISPOSED. To Punarvasu are 
_assigned—men. XxV—-5 
To be— vai LXIX—39 
CHARITY. oe XV-—24 
CHARMS. | he LXXV—5 
CHARMADWEEPA. He XIV-~—9 
CHARMARANGAS. 2 XIV—-23 
CHARMERS. ‘at xXV—4 
CHARMING DRESS. .» LXXVITI—13 
CHARMING PERSONALITY. sae XVI—29 
CHARUDEVI. es IX—18 
CHASHA. LXXXVI—41, 43, 48 
CHASM. sg LIII-—-90 
CHATAKA BIRDS. Cries of— de XXIV—19 
Clouds showing the color of — we XXVITI-—14 

For omens,~~should not be considered in the 

month of Sravana. we LXXXVI—27 
CHATIKA., coe LXXXVIL+9 
GHATU KARA. ww» LEXXI-~35 
GHATURASRAS, es Xi—25 
GHATUSHKONA. see LVI~-18 


MHATHSHPADA. oa G—2, 5 


INDEX 49 


CHAURAKA. cos XCV—7 
CHEDI.— is situated iu the South. nae XIV—8 
The Sun presides over— dee: xVI—3 
The-—s will be ruined. XI—59, XXXII—22 
Indra gave a flagstaff to the king of wes XLITI—8 
CHEEKS.—are masculine limbs, ais LI-—8 
If the querist touches the— ies LI-—33 
The--of the Sun-God should be elevated... LVIII—46 
A bull with—covered with thick veins. ee LXI—5 
Horses having hairy circles on the— ee LXVI-—-2 
Unsunken— .» LXVIII—60 
A man with fine— ae LXIX—10 
A man with plump— -»-LXIX-—-20, 24 
The flaming of the lower part of the— oe XCIII-—4 
CHEERANIVASI. me XIV—31 
CHEMISTS. ise XVI—20 
CHERISHED OBJECT. ang LIi--12 
CHERYARYAKAS., sae XIV—15 
CHESHTABALA. ae II—(14) 
CHEST.—is a neuter limb. oe LI—9 
When a querist touches the— at LI—12 
Pimples on the-- bes LII-—4 
The House-God has Apavatsaon the —... LII—51 
Having an even— .. LUXVITI—29 
Having—raised ... LXVITI—86 
CHICH CHID THITH THID. LXXXVIII—47 
CHICK CHIKI. LXXXVIII--27, 29 
CHIEFS. Ruling—living in the land. “ee IV—15 
Marching—will conquer. See XVITI—5 
Houses of feudatory— sa LIII—8 
CHIEF MINISTER. oe V—41 
CHIEFS ON MARCH. ae AXVI—5 
CHIEFTAIN, IV—24, LXXXVI—11 
The marching—will meet with his end. aT XVII—21 
CHIKKARA., we LXXXVI—44 
CHILDLESS. ee LXVITI-—S5 


B. Ss. 7. 


50 INDEX 


CHILDREN.—will be happy. 


—-engage themselves in sports. 
—procuring food for their parents. 


XIX-—-12 
XXII--6 
XXITV—-30 


Construction of bridges on high road by— ... XXVITI—-5 


Rahu causes trouble to—in the womb.. 
If ropes should give way,-~will suffer. 


XXXIV—~15 
ALILI—66 


If tender plant blossoms very luxuriantly will die. XLVI——26 


Loss of — LI—16; LIV—98 
When-—are in front of a woman at a query ... LI—37 
Pimples on the temples give— LII-—3 
Destruction of— LIWN—38 
Increase of— Be LX—5 
Devoid of — ...LXVITI—7, 70 
To beget too many— LXVITI—15 
Birth of—who will be long-lived. ~o LAXXVILI—~23 
Pearls bestow—, victory. LXAAXI—22 
To possess— CI—14 
To be deprived of one’s— aids CIiI—1 
To become the mother of many— Clit--2..:3 
Mercury bestows many— CII[—12 
CHILDREN IN THE WOMB, Rahu has in— 
fluence over-— XVI--36 
CHIN, Tf one touches his— LI—3+4 
Pimples on the lower part of the— Lil-=35 
The nose, forchead,—and neck should be 4 
digits long. LVIII-—-5 
Long—s indicate poverty. LXVILI—51 
(CCHINA—will suffer destruction. V--77 
—~js situated in the north. XIV—30 
The Sun presides over— XVI—1 
CHINESE. Trouble to the— paca | 
——will come to decay. X11 
Comet unfavourble to the— XI—61 
Ketu presides over— X VI-—-38 
CHINTICHI sais XCV—SE 
CHIPPIKA. » LXXXVILI—3! 


CHTPUTA NASFKAS, 


XIV—-2€ 


iNDEX 51 


CHIRULA IRULU. ° LXXXVIII—28, 31, 38, 45 

CHITRAKUTA. ot XVI-—17 

CHITRAKUTA HILL, see XIV—13 

CHITRABHAM. i VITI—35 

CEES Transit of Mercury through— 55 VU—11 

—is one of the asterisms in the Aja Veethee .. IX-~—3 
When Venus is in—, diggers of wells and birds 

will suffer. eee IX—30 

Effect of Saturn in-- sae X10 

Ketu touching or eclipsing— ee XI—-57 

Things assigned to— cae XV—12 

— belongs to the servant class. ste XV—30 

Rain in— ot XXITI—6 

—is in the wind circle, ses XXXII—8 

When-—is struck by a meteor we) «=X XXITI—18 

Iffect of Moon conjoining with— -- XLVII~18 
—is one of the asterism selected for the planting 

of trees. es LV—31 

Effect of wearing a cloth in— Bag LXXI—4 

--for boring ear-lobes. san C—6 

Effect of birth in— oe CI—8 
First two padas of—arte in Kanya and the other 

two arein Tula. CIJ-—3 and ClI—4 

CHOLA. People of—will be destroyed, sae V—40 
A comet hit by an Ulka proves untavourable to 

people of— Sie XI—61 

The-—s are situated to the south of Bharatavarsha, XIV-—13 

Mars presides over— vee XVI—10 

Ketu presides over—s. as XVI--38 

_ a constituent of the Gandiarnaes, + LXXVII—14 

CHOLERA. Peril from— .» LXXXVII—44 

CHOWRIES. II—(18); IlI—~18 

belong to Jupiter. gas XVI-—-24 

To collect and sell— She XLII-—7 

Garlands shaken by white— ioe XLIV—24 

A wagtail perched on— oe XLV-—5 


Damsels that have the marks of — 6 LXx—10 


52 INDEX 


Excellences of the— eye LXXII-—2 
Handle of the— ~» LXXII—3, + 
' If figures of—appear. we LXXIX—21 
One will get— » LXXXVIIT—12 
Dogs passing wine on— ..LXXXIX—I(a) 
CHUCHCHUNDARI., .» LAXXVITI—5 
CHUCHU. » LXXXVI—37 
CHUGLU. LL XXX VITI-—-22 
CHULLI. ee LII—38 
CHUNAM. we = XXVITI~-15 
CHURNA. -» LXXXI—17 
CHYAVANA. .» XLVIII—66 
CIRCLES. cee XLVI—67 
CIRCULAR. es LXXIII-—6 
CITY. Jackals howling at the gates of the— ... XLVI—68; 
LXXIV-~1 
The—will be destroyed in 2 months, ww. LXXXVI—64 
Civil feud in—ies, or X—19 
—jes in the sky. ai XXI—25 
To make the—ies indistinguishable, we XXXVITI~1 
Dog barking in the—gate. oa LXXXIX~—20 
CITIZENS. Discord between the king’s troops and the-- ]1X-—23 
To Jupiter belong the— aa XVI—24 
—come to grief. ass XVII-—16 
Destruction of— wai XXXIX—Z 
In the company of the— XLIJI—23; XLVII1-~48 
Being surrounded by the— — wee XLITI--60 
CIVIL FEUD. There will be—in cities. ue X—19 
CLAPPING OF HANDS. XXXITI—-23; LXXXVI-—39 
CLASH OF ARMS. ss XXX—21 
CLAY. Idol made of— es LX--4 
When the crow’s mouth is filled with wet— ... XCV—~—13 
CLEAN. ae CI—14 
CLEANLINESS, | we’ LXIX—5 
CLEANSING. . ws UXXXV—I1 
CLEVER. The Mandalaka is— see LXIX-——37 


The person born in Aswint will be— ses CI--1, 13 


INDEX 53 
The person born in Swati will be— CI-—8 
CLITORIS. LXX-+3 
CLOD. LX&XIX-—22 
CLOD OF EARTH. XLV—9 
CLOTHS. Mesha presides over— XLI—2 
Vrishabha presides over— XLI—3 
Dhanus presides over— , &LI-6 
To buy and sell— XLII—8 
Fire and sparks observed in— sii XLVI—22 
Deities to be worshipped with— XLVIII-—33 
When the querist leaves his—from his body ... LI—12 
If abe seen or mentioned by the querist. LI—15 
The tree should be worshipped with— XLVI-—31 
One will obtain silken— LI—19 
Gods dwell in the four corners of a— LXXI-—9 
When—are stained with ink, LXXI—10 
A slit in— LXxI—l1 
One will obtain— LXXXVII—13, 15, 16, 17 
Pimples on the nose gives. LII—3 
Trouble to one’s coloured— we» LXXXVII—40 
When a dog comes with a-—, one will get 
miseries. ... LXXXIX—1(c) 
CLOTHES. Injuries to— II—(18) 
The Moon presides overz— see XVI—8 
Mesha presides over—made of goats’ hair. XLI-2 
To be adorned with— XLIV—27 
One will get--when XLV—7; XCV—23 
The things contained in one’s— jus LI-—7 
To lose— | XCV—15 
Gain of—- XCV—54 
To present Brahmins with— CV—8 
CLOUDS. : XLVITI—69 
If there should be—of various colours. a V---93 
Mars will spoil the thick— ace VI—11 
will shower hail stones. IX—42 
—will be destroyed when XVII—17 


~-do not pour forth sufficient rain. 


XIX-—-2 


$4 


, The—will not let loose anywhere much water 
The sky is covered with towering— 


INDEX 


The sky will be covered with— 


The sky will be bereft of— 


The symptoms of the pregnancy of — 


—formed in the east. . 


Symptoms at the time of conception of— 


Floating banks of— 

~-that resemble pearls. 
——scorched by the Sun’s rays. 
A cross line of — 

Embryo of-—-accompanied by 


Quantity of rainfall as a result of — 


Sky covered with glossy— 

The Moon screened by the— 
Effects of the— 

Sky blocked by— 

Elephants in the form of— 
Clusters of— 

Sky covered with banks of— 
Should the--be rough and small. 


Effect of-—~formed in the directions, 


Tf—thunder. frequently 

Groups of dark—every where 
The—shed a few drops of water. 
The—will inundate tbe earth. 
If——show the colour of peacocks, 
—~as white as chunam., 

A cross baf,of— 

The—will pour down rain. 
If—thunder close to the earth. 


If there be glow-worms at night near the—  ... 
—shaped like cross-bar, a tree, a stick, 


Fish-like—, , 

—in the fori of a Danda. 
Blue and tree-shaped— 
~—in inauspicious forms 


XXVITI—16; 


XIX—4 
XXN-+-3 
XIX—15 
XIX—20 
XXI--3 
XXI—13 
XXI—15 
XXI—19, 20, 22 
XXI—23 

NX I-24 

XXI—26 

XXI—31 
XXI—32, 37 
XXII—1 

NXXI{-—-4 
XXIV—12, 13, 14 
XX1V—16 
XXIV—i7 
XXIV—18 

XXIV —20 
XXIV—2] 

.. XXIV—23, 24 
XXV—S5 

AX VIIT—I1 

we) Co XXVII~3 
iwi AXVII—7 
XXVII—14 
XXVIU—15 
XXX—25 
XXVIU—17 
XXVIII—18 
XXVILI—23 
_ XXX--2 
as XXX—8 
. XXX—16 
ae XXX—18 
si XXX—2I 


INDEX 55 


Aerial city of— aes XXX— 23 
The Sun covered on the right side by— aes XXX—24 
—having the shapes of a banner, umbrella, etc., XXX—~28 
-——produce effect. ie XXX—3] 
—will be destroyed we =60y XXXII —14 
-—~sending loud peals of thunder. wee) MAX TI—17 
Hluge—resembling blue lily. we) CX XANII—21 
A meteor that disappears ruins the— jie ATT H=29 
The rays of the Sun and the Moon with a few 
-~become halos. wee OMX XLV—] 
Little razor-like— Pr, ?,0.6 h' foo 
Thunder destroying— see OK AKNKIX TOS 
Tire emitting sound like-~ we =) MM LILI-—34 
A stone resembling a se LIV—107 
Pearls got from— ws LXXXI—1 
Pearl is produced in the— we LXNXXI-—24 
The pearls got from—cannot be easily recognised. LXXXI--29 
Tf a crow caws after the thunder of — cae XCV—17 
The effects accruing from shapes of—will come 
to pass in sae XCVII-—3 
CLOUDLESS NIGHT. o XLVI—21 
CLOUDLESS SKY. a XXIV--22 
CLOUD-TREE. ae AXK-—-19 
CLOVES. Tossing up and down-- sae XX VII—4 
Betel leaf made fragrant by-—— we LXXVII—37 
CLUB. Armament of-—s Ose XIX—3 
(sod of Death with a—in his hand as LVIII-—57 
The handles of— see LXXII—4 
CLUSTER. vee NK AANIIT——27 
COAL. ie XLVI—41 
COASTS. sah IX—15 
COBBLERS. LXXXVII—8, 35 
COBWEBS., as XLVI—79 
COCK, »° II—(18), LXIII—1, 2 
—s§ crowing in the evening. oe =©60do & LVI--69 
Resounding with the notes of the— w XSLVIII—6 


Umbrella to be made of the feathers of—- -... ULXXIi—1 


56 INDEX 


¢ 


Theis strong in the east. we LXXXVI—20 
, should be treated as good for journey in the 

| fore-noon. .. LXXXVI—48 
One “will get—s. we LXXXVII—6 
The—s crow as ws UXXX VITI—34 
COCK’S EYES. an XXVITI~6 
COCOANUTS. see XLI—4 
COCOANUT TREE. as LIV—40 
COHABITATION. Illicit— . es LII-—8 
——with forbidden women. ae LXVIII—3 
COITUS. LXXVIII--12, 16 
COLD BLAST. se XLVI—92 
COLD GROUND, me ' LIV—94 
COLD SPOT. Su LIV—94 
COLIC. People will suffer from — jae V--51 
People will die of — see. ‘Ie SNIEl 2d 

A person of the Sasa class will be afflicted with— LXIX—23 
COLLAR BONE—is a neuter limb. eee LI-—9 
One who has undulating—s. » LXVIIL--30 
represents the 7th stage of life. se LXX—25 
COLLYRIUM., XXVIII—6, 15; XXX-—-15; XXXII—21; 

XLVIII—30, 35; LIV-~-107, 110 
COLE or LXVI—5 


COMETS. XI~—13, 14, 16, 17, 18, 20, 33, 37, 43, 47, 49, 
53, 54, 55, 58, 59, 61, 62; XII—-22; XX—6; XLVI 


—12; XCVII—3 

COMMANDANT. When Saturn moves in Krittika, 

. 77s suffer, wis X—4 
To Jyeshta are assigned—s, ar XV—16 
The Moon presides over—s. ae XVI—8 
—s of armies: will be slain. -as. LG VII—-23 
Rod of the umbrella of a— . .- LXXITI—4 

COMMANDER.—~of the army is indicated by the 
Saugandhika flower. owe’ * XXIX—10 
Misery to—s of armies. : ww. XXXIV~13 
A rain-bow destroys the—in chief, wee KK XV 7 


Aerial city harmful to—s of armies. w= XXXVI—I1 


INDEX $7 


Afi tiinatural behaviour in the image of Ganapatt 
foréshadows evil té the-~of the army. .... XLVI~<42 


Crown of the— wee MLIX—~3, 5 
If the queriet sees a teacher, his thought concérhs 

the-~-of an afthy. bas LI—2l 
The breadth of the houses of-——s eis LITIT-—~24 
The houses of a—in chief. . or LIZI—5 
of armies having red nails «+ LXVILTI—41 


Marks of wheel, swords, etc., in one’s wrist going 
towards the palm make him a—of the army. LX VITI—47 


Lean and lank ears lead one to be 4— «© LXVITI—58 
A-—-of armies. -- LXIX~20 
Couch of the—in chief .» LXXIX~—9 
The Southern quarter is owned by the—of the 
army. ..» LXXXVI—34 
CONCHS.—will be destroyed. see VII—6 
Sounds of— XLIV—7, 16; XLVIII—49 
The image of Krishna should have a—in one of 
the left arms. ...LVITI—33, 35 
Figures of-— we LXVITI-45 
-—one of the varieties of gems. ded LXXX—5 
CONCH SHELLS. The Moon presides over— ... XVI-—7 
The mines of— is XIV-—14 
To Revati are assigned— Seid XV—25 
—-s are to be determined from the Tilaka tree. XXIX——~§ 
Buying and selling of— see XLII—10 
Figures of— LXIX—17, 24; LXX—10 
Pearls are got from— LXXXI—1, 28 
Sound of-~are strong in the north. wo. LXXXVI-~23 
Sound of—is auspicious to the left of a traveller. LXXXVI~39 
CONCUBINAGE. .» LXVIII-—9 


CONCUBINES. Increase and prosperity of—is presaged 
by the luxuriance of the Syama Creeper, ...° XXIX—13 


—will suffer. , we =XXXII—11 
CONDEMNED CRIMINAL. sds LI—21 
CONFINEMENT. L—16, LII—7 
CONFLICT, — V—-84, XVII—1 


B, 8. 8. 


53. INDEX: 


CONFUSION. ° DS ge” SELVI--23 
CONGREG ATIONAL MOURNINGS. 1. LXXVIII—11 
CONICAL. © LXVIII-58 
CONJUNCTION. . ee on IV—23, 26 
Moon in-with Rohini. . XXIV—36, XXVI—12 
Moon’s—with Swati and Anuradha. XXIV—25, XXVI—12 
Moon’s—with Ashadha. . XXVI—-13 
CONNOISSEURS OF WARES, ) ae XV—23 
CONQUEST ! wae XVI—-39 
CONSECRATION. ae LX—22 
CONSTITUENT ELEMENTS. (14) 
CONSTITUTION-- .. LXXVITI—17 
CONSULTATION, .. LAXVIN—I1 
CONSTRUCTION, Commencement of the—of a house. LITI—100 
—of Houses. LIX—14, XCVIII—17 
CONTACT. ae XCV—42 
CONTEMPLATION. ..  LXIX—15 
CONTENTED. To team with a—population ... XII—21 
The subjects of a country will be— 2  XLVII-5 

The person born in Punarvasu will be— we _ CI-—-4 
CONTENTMENT. Peace and—to the subjects ... VI—13 
| Years bringing joy and—to people. eF VIlI-—-42 
There will be rain and— in the world. we) = XX NIT—29 
CONVEYANCE. we LXVIII—116 
CONVICTION. ... LXXIV—14 
CONVULSION. se XCIII-—5 
COOKED FOOD. wee LXXXVII—7 
\COOKED RICE. . SXLVI—36 
COPPER. XLVIII-—46, _ LI-17, LX—5 
COPYISTS. , ‘4. XVI-I18 
CORALS, XVI—14, XXIX—8, XLII-—10, LI-—-37, LXXX-—5 
CORIANDER, | LXXVII—15, ULXXXI—6 


CORN. Il—(18), IV—-23; V—20, 22; VIII-—-5, XV—12, 13, 
24; XVII—-17; XVIII~18, XXXIV—12, XL-—4, 5, 13; 
XLI—3, 6; XLIJ—3, 4, 8; XLVI—41, 46; LI—16, 
18, 22, 30; LII—6, LIII—67, LXXXVII—16; 
"'XCV—5, 11, 13, 22, 32 


INDEX 59; 


CORN-RICKS... eke XLV—6 
CORONATION. : ‘- ee XLVITI--8 
CORPORATION. wes XV—85 
CORPULENT... Vasaketu who is— wee °C R29 

A man of a—physique. we LXVITI—-113 
CORPULENT , MOON. eee IV—20 
CORYNDON STONE. ais LIV—28 


COSTUS. To, Jupiter belongs— XVI—25, XLIV—5, 9; LI— 
15; LXXVII—5, 6, 10, 32 


COT. Figure of a—in one’s palm. eooLeXLX—-22, 29 
Effect of using a— made of LXXIX—11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 
16, 17, 18 
COTTON—crop will be destroyed =. V—75 
—#is assigned to Purva phalguni sae XV-—9 
—is assigned to Visakha. ies XV—14 
The state of-——crop is known trom ee XXIX—5 
Sign Vrishabha presides over— sae XLI-—3 
Trade in—cloths. ee XLIT-—8 


If a crow brings or takes away—from a person. XCV—15 
‘COUCH. LXXI—9; LXXIV-—1; LXXIX—1, 5, 8, 9, 10,°15, 
18, 19, 26, 27, 38, 39; LXXXIX~—l(b) KXCV—~—12 


COUGH. People will suffer from— sae VIII—48 
Asthma and—will prevail. sas IX—44 
COUNTERFEITS. bei XV-—-7 
COUNTRY. . Assignment of—ies. oon 1I—(18) 
—1es signified by asterisms. sais V-~-42 
Pots bearing the names of——ies. oe == XATV-—-27 
The value of—ies. | aus XXVI-—8 


Destruction of the— XXX—5, 30; XLVII--27; -XC—6 
Ruin of the-—-XXXI—1; XXXIII—11; XLVI—25, 43, 52, 76 


Danger to the— XXXITI—20, 21, 23 
Aerial cities in all directions bodes ill tomies, ... XXXVI-—3 
—to be victim of foreign invasion. ww. XXXVITI—6 
Devastation of the . XLV—7; XLVI-—82 
Well-being of one’s—- °° ; ‘ee | KLVI-9 
The—will be thrown into confusion. - ee )=© XLVI-—-26 


Calamity in store for the— © eS lt. | XEVI-A-44 


66: INDE 


4 


The central— oe )©=— MEL VIE? 
Thée-erewhere the ruler meets with hisend. ... XLVII-~2¢ 
Trees can be.taken to other—ies. ox LV--7 
An emblem. too thin and long destroys them .... LVIII--55 
Prosperity on the— ww © LXIW—I!1 
When a-~is. conquered. we «=a XXIV] 
—will be destroyed in 3 months. LXXXVI--64, 66 
The—will be denuded. ust XCV--5 
COUPLES. Disharmony among— uae V—97 
Ornamented with the carvings of—~ des LVI~-15 
COURAGE. LXIX—8; LXXIV-—-14; LXXXVI—19 
OSs, us CI-~14 
COURIERS. — ies K—10 
COURT-YARD. ses LII—70 
COURTESANS.—will have trouble. ie: X—8 
Thunder destroying— vee MAA XZ 
—will die. we) MK LITTI-65 
When a querist looks at an ascetic, the query is 
about a=—- dee LI--20 
Houses of-— asl LITI--8° 
One will come in contact with a— AXA VIT—-15 
COURTESY. Speech being full of — es LXX—~7 
-~js the sole cause of winning the affection of the 
opposite sex. woe «= LX VS 
COVETOUS. ees Clrr9 
COW. II--(18), XLVIII—68 
Those living by~—s will suffer. Say VIiil—3 
The abodes of —s will suffer ruin. se IX-—~42 
-~s are assigned to Rohini. see XV-—-2 
When Jupiter is vanquished by Venus,~-will be 
destroyed. we) CK VII—18 
Tho-~s yield abundant milk. XIX—-5, XXXII-—29 
Stored with large herds of-~s, oe’ 1S 
At the time of the—s returning home. we) RS ITV —-35 
Tha value of—s is determined by ° sag Xx VI—-8 
+g’ stampede. we) RAK VEL —7 


+a look yp towards the Sun. pe) ww VELI-~8 


INDEX 6) | 


If—s are reluctant to go out of the house, - ... XXVIII--9 
The price of—s should be determined from the 


Patala trees. eat XXIK—~-7' 
Smoky rays of the Sun cause the ruin of-s ... XXX~-1} 
Wagtails near—s, ~ er XLV—5 


If gifts of—s are made to Brahmins. XLVi—46, XCVII~—17 
‘When the Moon’s horns appear similar to those 

of-——s. uae XLVII— 16 
The dung of—s proves destructive to young ladies. LI—18 
If querist touches the frontal bone, he must have 


eaten the flesh of a— or LI-~34 
The signs of cows. ‘ny LXI—1 
——s that are not auspicious. soe LXI—2 
One whose face resembles that of a-— .» LXVITJ--103 
—g are pure at the back. oe §6©0 ld LXXIV—8 
Omens in abodes occupied by— .. LXXXVI~17 
Theis strong in the west. .. LXXXVI—-22 
The—should not be considered for omens in 

Aswayuja and Kartika, ve LXXXVI—-27 
A--is very good in the north, » LXXXVI—45 


If the omen is in the north-east one will get a— 


If a dog urinates on a— -. LXXRIX--] 
A dog sporting with-—s. vw. LAXXIX—10 
--s looking jaded. ies XCII—1 
—s crying without any reason. bug XCII—2 
Increase of—s. jen XCII-—3 
If a crow cries ‘Gad’, one will get—s, sue XCV—55 
Things relating tos will become fruitful in 
Chatushpath Karana. igs cC=5 
Dust raised by the hoofs of the-—in the evening. CIUI—13 
COW-DUNG. Wagtail perched on a heap of— XxLV—7 
Ablutions may be done in a cow-pen fullaf- XLVII—11 
Trees if smeared with— ai LV~—7 
Cloth stained with— i LAXI-—10 
passing urine on dry or wet— cage o 


Dog sitting qo—in front or behind person . RCVY—38 


62 INDEX . 
COW-ELEPHANT—bringing forth twins, .. XLVI—-53 


_ When one sees a—_— ee LI—19 
cow's EYES. sea XXVITI—4¢ 
COW-HERDS.—will suffer loss. ee V—68 

Distress to— ‘ oP IX—13. 
To Purvabhadra are assigned— ae XV—23 
Trouble from— wes LXXXVII—45 
COw’s HIDE. soe LVII—7 
COW’S HORN. — LVII—7 
COW-PEN. ew.» XLVITI—11 
COW’S TONGUE. L-—7 
COW’S URINE. A sword having the smell of L—21 
To be dissolved in— sei LIV—115 
Tooth-sticks to be put for a week in— .. LXXVIT—31 
COW-SNEEZING. woe LXXX VITI-——-35 
CRAFTY. w»  LXVITI—20 
CRANES. Cries af— XLVITI~—9, LXXXVITI—37 
CREATOR. XXXII—5, XLIII—1, 3; XLVI~10, 59 


CREATURES.—that are relevant to journeys. ... LXXXVI—10 
—that roam by day and those by night. .« LXXXVI~18 


—that are strong ee LXXXVI—19 
——mating members of another species. we LXXXVI—66 
CREEPERS. .. XLVIII—67 
—revealing effects contrary to the seasons ... III—10 
Bowers of— os XXVII-—3 
Sprouts of—turned up towards the sky, we «= XAXVITI-~13 
—fully packed with glossy leaves. jane XXIX-—14 

- Vrischika presides over fruits of— at XLI—6 
Trees entwined by— XLHI~-13, LXXIX—3 
Unnatural changes in— jae XLVI—95. 

If certain—are to be found growing. w. LIV—48, 88 

A place where—are smooth. wet LIV—101’ 

A rock resembling in colour some-~ wee = =©LIV—108 
Flower of Angushtika— fate LIV—109 

' "Jasmine -. esi LV—4 
' Flowers: of-— ioae" | LV—I18 


‘. Aved round a temple'should-be ornamented by-- - LVI-~—15 


Venus will destroy— 


INDEX 63 
- A dog coming with a shrivelled— wee aX XXIX—1(d) 
Crow building its nest on— 3 XCV-—5 
Crow cawing holding a~— XCV—42 
CREMATION GROUND. woe LsXXXIX—1(b) 
‘CRESCENTS. XLITI—57 
‘CREST. Number of—s in the several crowns XLIX—5 
A white cock with— dive LXITI—1 
CRIES.—of Birds and Beasts. XCVI—1 
CRIPPLE. LXXIX-—28 
CRIPPLED PERSONS, XVI—35 
CROOKED, Elephants having—limbs. LXVII—9 
Men with—eyes become thieves, XLVIII—65 
CROOKED TAIL. A bitch with a— LXII—2 
CROCODILES. If clouds resemble— XXVITI—14 
Ulkas resembling— XXXITI—9 
One with a palm with figures of a— LXVIII-—48 
CROPS. Increase of — HI—-5 
There will be good—when IV—11 
Fore-runner of plenty of good— Iv—i9 
—of the autumnal season. V=Zl 
Destruction of— V—24, 39, 61, 76, 82; VIL—19; XXXL 
—1; XXXV—5; XXXIX—4 

Danger to the—through locusts. a V--52 
Cotton—will be destroyed. oes V~79 
—will be medium. ay V—85 
There will be abundance of— V—87; VITII—6, 9, 36 

In the Prakrita course of Mercury there will 
be good— ee VIi—14 
—will be affected by wild animals. VII-—-4 
The—will be good only here and there  VITi—7, il 
, There will be no second—in the year. — ViTI~13 
The—will flourish. VIII-—44 


pee IX-~14, 26 


Growth of IX~15; XL—l, 11 
come to decay. X—11, XXXII-—10 


The—will be at their best. 
There will be very little— 


we XVILI—S. 
a XIX—1 


H+ INDEX” 


witht dut. | 6 KIX—§ 
Fhe earth will teem with excellent—- XIX-r1$; XXVI—15 
Raia tending to the growth of all— XXII-—8, XXV-—5 
There will be good—  XXIV—23, 33; XXVII—5, 6, 93, 


XLVI---34 
Thriving of— a XXIX—1 
Through the Aswattha should be determined the 
success of all— : see XXIX—~3. 
Summer—will thrive. we  XL—2, 3; 
—will be destroyed. XL-—8, 9, 10; XLVII—16 
The— will get the six-fold pest. ss XLVI~42 
There will be increase of — ie XLVI—9I1 
The--that have grown perish. ee LIV—61 
If a dog barks inside a house, there is danger 
to the— wee LXXXIX—19 
Crow cawing from a place of— a XCV—34 
CROSS BAR. ee XXX—2 
CROSS WAY. ve LIlI—89 
CROW. The science of foretelling good or evil by , 
the cawing of—s. “is 1I—(18) 
When the several Ketus assume the forms of a III—8, 17 
Clouds having the shapes of—s. _ XXIV—21 


Effect of a—sitting ori the king’s banner. ..... XLIII—62 
Sun appearing marked with the figures of—s. XLVII—~24 
The—caws even after hearing the warbling of 

the Cuckoo. we =) S&L VIT—28 
Dents resembling a— or L-3 
A white cocking pleasantly at down. vee LXIII-—1 
Women with hands marked with the figures of—-s, LXX-~22 
When cutting the tusk (of elephants) if figures 


of—s appear. ae LXXIX—24 
For perposes of omens, ais of no consequence. 
in the winter season. wee LUXXXVI-~26 
When a blue jay fights with a—and is defeated 
. by the latter, | ee L XXXVIL—24 
Almost the entire Adhyaya. des xCV— 


CROW'S EGGS. ww. , SXVITI—4 


INDEX 65 


CROW FEET. we => LXX X15 

CROWN. Royal—s. see XLIX-*1 

—~s of the King, Queen, Yuvaraja, etc., ... XLIX—2 

-~s of the commander of the army. as . XLIX—3 

—s of the Royal protege. ar XLIX-— 3 

Length of— a XLIX--4 

Crests in a royal-~ oe ALIX-—5 

Deng in the middle of a— ; gee & SRE Xe7 

—with commendable signs. XLIX—8 
Kubera should have a—placed on the left dite 

of the head. a LVIII-—57 


CRUEL, The country whose ruler is-—will go to ruin. XLVI—76 
One who has undulating collar bones becomes — LX VII[I—30 


Men with uneven palms will be— .. LXVITI~-40 
Men with blue eyes will be— .. LXVIITT -65 
The Ruchaka type man is— os LXIX—27 
The Jaghanya, aservant of Malavya type men is— LXIX-~34 
The Sun presides over men of disposition ... XVI-—5 
The fire seen in the south bodes evil to—men. XXXI-—3 
To Ardra are assigned—people. es XV~—4 
To Bharani, belong—men. ae XV—27 
Stars belonging to—persons. Ses XV-~-29 
CRUELTY. or LXX—18 
CRY. w. LXXXVI--6 
CRYING. The—of wild animals standing in a ‘ Burning’ 
quarter. ae XCIi-—-1 
The-—of wild animals in the border of a town. NCl=2 
The--of cows without any reason. sais XCiI-—-2 
CRYSTAL. Colour of—gnmm. See LLV—110 
A tortoise having the colour of— sag LXIV-—] 
Handle of a white umbrella is made of— __.... LAXIII-~-g 
—~, one of the gems, ee LXXX—4 
Pearl resembling— . we = LXXXI—28 
Rubies born of-- we LXXXII—2 


CUCKOO.—s warbling in the dewy season. Mes XLVI—69 
Crow caws even after hearing the warbling of the— XLVII—28 
Notes of birds like the virile-—s. . XLVUI—7 


B. Ss. 9. 


66 | INDEX 


Women whose speech are sweet like the notes of the—- LXX—~—7 
-~is strong in the north. .. LXXXVI--—-23 
—is of no consequence in the vernal season ... LXKXXVI—26 
—-ig favourable when it is on the left sside of a 


traveller. » LDXXXVI—37 

Crows that have wings similar to those of the—- = XCV--11 
CUDGELLERS. ie XV—27 
CULTURED. sae LXIX--11 
CUMIN SEED. es LI-15 
CUPID. ..  LXXVI—2 
CUPID'S ARROWS. _ XXIV~—32 
CURD. Invoke the banner with— ..  XLITI—60 
A rain of—s. aie XLVI—43 

To the west of the sacred fire should be placed-- XLVIlI—35 

If one sees—s. w.)6d LXXIK~7 
Pearls hued like—s, oa LXXXI—5 

A virgin and—are good in the west. we LXXXVI—45 

An omen in the north, one will obtain—s, . LXXXVII—14 

If near a horse there is a full pot of ~s, ou XCIII--8 

One will gets. ce XCV-—22 

A wagtail on—pots. Sa3 XLV—6 
CURLY. ».  LXIX—16 
CURVED. .. LXVITI—61 
CUT. A nose apparently — .. LXVIU—61 
When a cloth is— ae LXXI~—10 
CUTCH. i IV—22 
CUTTING.—of the tree (for house-building) ae LII—121 
Pecultarities in the-~of timber. see LII—122 
—of trees for purposes of images. si LIX ~12 
CYCLE. ..LXXXVII~—19 
CYCLE OF QUARTERS. XCV—49; LXXXVII—18 
CYLINDER. we =O LOI—28 
CYLINDRICAL, .. LXXIII—6 


CYPEROUS GRASS. a LI—15 


INDEX 67 


D 
DADHEECHI. ..  LXXX—3 
DAHANA. =) XLVII—4 7 
DAHANA VEETHI. IX—1, 3, 4 XI—32 
DAITYAS. XI{I~11, XLVIII—30 
DAKSHA. .. XLVIII—64 
DAKSHINA. XLIII—38; XLVI—32, 65, 73 
DAKSHINA HANU-BHEDA, ~~) V—81, 82 
DAKSHINA HANU. = VBI, 82 
DAKSHINA KUKSHI .. ~~. V—81, 84 
DAKSHINA PAYU, ..  V-8l1, 86 
DAMANAKA, . LXXVII~—13 
DAMARAS. ne XIV-—30 


DAMODARA. oes CV -15 
DAMSELS. LXX—10; LXXIV~1I, 2, 4, 17, 19; LXXVI—3, 


12; LXXXVI—80; XCV—21, 43, 44, 55 
DANA. sea 


1i—(15) 
DANAVAS. «w. ALVITI-—36 
DANCERS. Saturn passing through. Aswini destroys— A=3 
Saturn in Swati will afflict — sae X— 10 
Mercury presides over— be XVI—20 
Roads filled with— ve XLII —26 
One will come in contact with— ww» LXXAXVII—6 
DANCING GIRLS. id V—74 
DANDA. II—(15), XX--2, XXX-—8, 16; XLVIT—19; LIII-—39 
DANDAKA. XVI~11; LXXXIX—!; CIV—61, 63 
DANDAKA COUNTRY. sie XI—-56 
DANDAKA FOREST. es XIV—16 
DANDA PINGALAKAS. _ XIV—27 
DANGER. One should guess—from Bhallataka. XXIX—11 
Producing—-after a week, se XXX—-12 
—to the king. » SASITI—12, 20 
— from fire and weapons. we) CU AXXITV—13 
-~within a week, : - MXXXVITI—2 
There is—impending if oe XLIII—28 


Flames from towns, animals, birds, etc., forebode— XLVI—22 


68 : INDEX 


Birds or beasts forming circles at dawn and twilight 


facing the Sun presage— mee XLVI—67 
Other phenomena denoting— XLVI~-69, 75, 77 
A sword with the smell of tortoise, marrow, blood 

or salt produces— at L-—-22 
Couches constructed from forbidden trees cause— LXXIX-—-5 
Omens foretelling— LXXXVI~59, 67 
Cry of wild animals near a town are reechoed by 

domestic, rural animals, there is—, ... XCI--2 
A wild animal dying at the town-gate, there is— xCI-—~3 
Horses dropping hair, eating the dust of the earth 

indicate— - XCIII—11 
Signs in elephants foreboding-— des XCIV—12 
Crows indicating— oe, XCV—11 


Crows cawing from the interior of a tree iadicate—XCV—17, 18 
Crow sitting on a full pot and striking it indicates XCV—44 


DANTI. ee XLIV~—9 
DANTURAKAS. ae XIV—6 
DANU. .. XLVITI—-57 
DARADAS. V—42, 79; XIII—9; XIV—29 
DARBBA. XLIV—4, LIV—100 
DARDURAS. saa XIV—11 
DARK. ta LXX--21 
DARK BLUE. ..» LXXVIII—16 
DARK BODY. ae LXAIV—2 
DARK CIRCLE. ou LXV-~-2 
DARK GEM. be LIV—107 
DARKNESS. Rahu is of the nature of pure ... V—3 


When the quarters resemble a mass of pitch XXXVIII—~1 
When the staff of the banner 1s covered with— XLIII-—65 
—geen at day-time tend to very great peril ... XLVI—2]1 


Where quality of predominates. we ° LXIX—9 
DARK STONE. ass * LIV—11 
DARVAS. 34 XIV—30 
DASAMEYAS. wv. =, ~S &LV 28 
DASAPURA. ae XIV-—12 


DASA. i vos ll—i+ 


INDEX ‘69 


DASARATHA. say LVIII~—30 
DASARNA. The people of —will suffer. X—15; KXXII— 1 
The-—s are in the south. iets XIV—10 
To Venus belongs— ins XVI—26 
DASARNA COUNTRY. as V—40 
DASERAKA, The people of —will suffer misery. V—67 
The-—s are in the north. : 2 XTV-—-26 
DATE TREE. ... LIV—58, 101 
DAUGHTER. Ruin of the king’s—s. sis XLVI—13 


If a querist touches his fingers, the query is about his— LI—~25 
Conspicuous and slender lines at the root of the 


thumb indicate— LXVITI—49; LXX—14 

Birth of a-— XCV—~—12; CIII—-9 
DAUGHTERS-IN-LAW. .- LXXIV-—10 
DAUVARIKA. LIII—44, 54, 56 


DAWN. XXVIHI--14, XXX—1, 4, 5, 6, 7,8, 17, 31; XXXIV 
—8; XLIII—19; XLVI—67, 75, 79; XLVITI—23; LXHI—1 


DAY. XIX—3; XXVITI—-17; XXXII—-7; XLVIII—59; 
LXXXVI~—18, 44, 48 
DAY TIME. XXXIII—16; XLVI-—21, 66 
DEACONS. ia XV—-17 
DEAD BODIES. Clouds having the shapes of— XXIV—21 
Meteors that resemble— ae XX XITI—9 
When dogs bring parts of—into houses. ves XLVI~—71 
A-—is very good in the south w..» LXXXVI—45 
Sight of a-— .. LXXXVII—~33 
Crow cawing on a limb of a-- ue XCV—39 
DEAF, ee XCVI—12 
DEATH. Time of one’s immediate— aay II—~(14) 
—of the Pandya king. hae IV—10 
There are many Ketus who are the sons of — XI—~12 
Copper-coloured rays of the Sun cause the~of 
a general. Ss XAXX—~13 


When Ketu is inside a halo, there will be— .... XXXIV—15 


' Smoke, fire, sparks observed in one’s beds, cloths 
and hairs forebode his— a XLVI~2¢9 


if the stalk of lotus, barley or wheat has a branch 
or two, it forebodes its owner's~— we =~ XLVI—33 


70 


INDEX 

Rain without clouds fore-tells king’s-— . XLVI-—38 
Phenomena foreboding disease or — “ee XLVI—61 
Planets without lustre and moving in the southern 

paths produce famine, theft and— ga XLVII—4 
If a sword is cut at the bottom,—of the owner, if 

at the tip, of his mother. L--8 
Dents in the first or 9th digit of the sword will - 

cause~of sons. ee i--16,. 17 
Dents in the 17th digit,— of the owner. 03 L-—18 
Dent in the 29th digit—of the owner. a L—19 


Indications foreboding—to men attacked by illness. | LI-~29 
Kinds of houses leading to the—of the house-holder. LIII—-40 


When the House God is bereft of the feet, there 
will be—of sons. sis LIlI— 68 


The God of-—should be mounted on a buffalo, LVUI—57 


A slit, etc., in the divisions of devils bodes -— 


of the wearer. ’ is LXXI-— 11 
The handles of clubs, umbrellas, etc., with ten 

knots produce— ve LXXIU— 5 
Omens stationed on funeral pyres bring about 

one’s — ... LXXXVI—60 
An omen portending— se BSAXVI-“7Z 
An omen in the south-western spoke portends 

—from fire. .» LAXXKVIL—44 
When a dog approaches a traveller with a burning 

stick, or dry bone, it indicaets his—  ... LXXXIX-—1(c) 
If jackal’s cry Ta-Ta, there will be news of 

some-body's-—- a YCa6 
The cry of a jackal in the south if reechoed by 

another indicates the—of arelation. ... XC—8 


If jackal’s cry sounds like Phi-Phe, there will be— XC—13 
Cows having eyes filled with tears indicate owner's— XCII—1 
If young ones of crow be of a mixture of colours, 


there will be-— sae XCV—7 
When a crow is perched on a tree whose top is 

burnt by fire, there will be— ae XCV——36 
Crow cawing sitting on a limb of a dead body 

causes fear of— ae XCV—~39 


The crow producing the sound of Kakha Kha , 
indicates the tourist’s— ssi XCV—52 


INDEX 71 


Blue flies clinging to one’s head bring about— XCV—-58 
Rahu in the 3rd house at the time of a marriage ‘ 
causes— an Cill—3 
Rahu in the 5th causes— bese CIII--5 
Jupiter or Venus in the 7th at the marriage chart cause—CI[I—7 
Moon, Venus and Rahu in the 8th cause— ... CII—8 
: Mars in the 1Oth causes — ie CIIT—10 
DECAY. ro VIII—52 
DECEIT. sae XCVITI—8 
‘DECEITFUL LXIX—9; CI—5 
DECORATIONS. she LVII—29 
DEEPTA. - LXXXVI~—12 
DEER. Phenomena connected with the— 1i—(18); XXx—2 
Ulkas resembling wild— .. MXXITI—9 
A halo attended with the cries of the— = =XXXIV-—~8 

If the querist touches the shank, he must have eaten 
the flesh of the-— is LI—34 


The seed should’ be fumigated with the flesh of the— LV—20 
A bull having the colour of a spotted— should be 


abandoned oe LXI—7 
The chamara-we e created for the sake of their hair. LX XII—1 
The—are strong in the north. .» LXXXVI—23 

The —are of no consequence in the winter season for 
purposes of omens, . LXXXVI—26 
An odd number of--moving from left to right. LXXXVI—43 
The--producing the Aa sound, LXXXVIITI—23 
A wild dog should be treated just likea— ... LXXXIX~—18 
DEERGHA GREEVAS, oe XIV—23 
DEERGHA KOSAS, P XIV—23 
DEERGHA TAPAS, .. ALVII—66 
DEERGHASYAS. see XIV—23 
DEFEAT. — of the 5 non-luminous planets. sae XVII—27 
- —at the hands of an enemy. .- S&LVI—61 
A sword not coming out of its sheath, forebodes— L—5 

' The flame appearing in the anus and the tail of a 

horse leads to the king’s— eae XCITII—2 


The smoke in a horse’s forehead, eyes, breast or 
forelegs leads to the owner s— ae XCITI—3 


14°; INDEX 


\ 


- If x horse neighs facing the ‘burning’ ave = 


owner will suffer— . XCWHI—10 
A planet is—ed when oe XVII—9 
DEFECTIVE STONES. ...  LXXXII-—4 
DEFORMED. shes LXIX-—39 
DEFORMED LIMBS. ... LXXVIII—17 
DEFORMED PERSONS. sat XVI-—-33 
DEITIES. After worshipping the infused-— ... XLVITT- 22 
13-—are situated inside. LIII—42, 43, 54, 69, 124 
—reside in places where there is water, gardens. LVI—3 
Installation of— = LX—zZl 
Omens in a city to the tutelary—or to the Mayor. LXXXVI—11 
Contact with the worshipper of a — . LXXXVIT--16 
If a horse neighs near a— ae XCIII--8 
The presiding—-ies of the asteriems. . XCVITN-S 
DELIVERY OF THE CLOUDS. XXI--9, 10, 11, 12 
DEMIGODS. _. a IX—38 
DEMONS. Marichi is understood to do harm to the-- XIII--8 
The Moon presides over— diss XVI--8 
A-—’ s head though cut off — V—1 
To withstand the—in battle. ee XLII—1 

A banner at the sight of which the ~will not stand 
in the battlefield. con XIII—2 
Any unnatural feature seen in the idols of — ... XLVI—-14 
In the dewy season, the sight of-—proves beneficial. XLVI-—-92 
The nature of men resembles that of — .. LXVITI--108 
A man of a~—iac nature is hot-tempered. .. LXVITI-—113 
The—reside in the middle part of the elephant’s tusk. XCIV-~8 
DEMONOLOGY. 3 se XVI—-19 
DENS. “ine XVI--17 
DENT, A-—in the middle of a crown. .  XLIX~7 
A-~in‘an odd inch in the measurement of the sword. L—l 
—gs resembling a ie | PaaS 
When the querist touches a head, the—will bein... L-11 
Effect of—s in the sword. L~16, 17, 18, 19 


DEODER-—is good for the images installed by Brahmins. LIX—5 
—# one of the trees recommended for the construction __ 
_of beds and seats. we LK RIK Z 


INDEX 73 
Couch made of —will not yield good results. ... DLXXIX—15 


—for tooth stick will give dignity, ve )=)—ClC LX XXV—-r7 
DEPENDANTS. If Rahu commences the eclipse in 
the west,—will be destroyed. ‘oe V—34 
Others’— that have dirty and colourless nails. LXVIL[—41 
DEPRESSED. we = LXVITI-—80 
DESERT. ae XVI—35 
DESERT REGIONS. ive LIV-—62 
DESIRED OBJECTS. Accomplishment of— ... LXXI1—6; 
LXXXVII—2 
DESOLATION. sae XVII—5 
DESTROY. ties XxC—6 
DESTRUCTION.-~—of people. a xC-—9 
Certain asterisms to be used for ruining enemies, ~—XCVIII—8 
DETACHMENT. ae LbSXIV—> 
DEVALA. VII—15; IX~1; XI—1; XXII---4; LXXXVI-—1 
DEVARAJA. .. MLVIII—67 
DEVASTATION. Countries will suffer— bas V—46 
—of the country. ie | OVE SZ 
DEVIKA RIVER. ae XI—-35 
DEVILS.—belong to Pulasthya. se XITI—11 
The nature of men resembles that of — wee LXVILTIM108 
DEVILISH NATURE. .. LXVITI~113 
DEVOTEES OF GODS. hy XV—19 
DEVOTION. Offerings should be made with— ... XLVI--65 
A person in whom the quality of —predominates. LXNIX—8 
Venus in the 12th makes a female —ed to her husband, CIII—~12 
DEW. is V—92 
DEW-LAP. oe LXI—12 
DEWY SEASON. ° ... XLVI—69, 93 
DHANAVAN. .. LXXXVI--32 


DHANISHTA,  Ill—1; VIf-~2, 11; Vill—-22, 27; IX—3, 20, 
33; X—16; XV--21, 30; XSII[-—-6;°XXXII-—16; XXXIIL 
-—18; LIV-~123; LXXI-6; CI—12; CII—5, 6 


DHANUS. nae Cli=5,.6 
. The Sun or the Moon being eclipsed in ~ ... V--41 
Configuration termed— | as XX—2 


B.S. 10. 


74 INDEX 


——presides over horses. sas XLI—6 
When the Sun is in-— « sae XLII-——10 
DHANUSHMAT, “ XIV—24 
DHANVANA. ..» LXXXVIII-—9 
DHANVANA BARKS. ost LVII—1 
DHANYA. | .. LXXVII—13 
DHAR.ANA., ..  MNXII-3, 4 
DHARMA. er XCIX—1 
DHARMAPATTANA., aoe XIV—14 
DHARMARANYA. ‘te XIV—3 
DHARMIKA., .. LXXXVI—30 
DHATU. aa ViII-—-31 
DHAVA.—~is one of the best trees. or XLILI-—-15 
The tree-~is to be avoided for house-building 
purposes. ee LUI—120 
—indicates the existence of water far off. ... LIV—105 
For making the wood-apple seeds sprout, take the 
roots of— i LV—22 
DHIK DHIK. ai XC—6 
DHIKKARA.—, (a kind of deer), LXXXVI—38; “LXXXVINT—7 
DHISHNYA. XXXIII—1, 2, 3, 6 
DHRITI. we MLVILI--57 
DHRUVA KARANAS, ee C2 
DHRUVA KETU ag XI—4] 
DHRUVA NAKSHATRAS, .» XCVIII—6 
DHUMA KETU. aes XxI-—9 
DHU MINI. eee LXXXVIW12 
DHUNDHUKA., LXXIX—32, 35 
DIADEM. Ii—(13); XLIX~1; LVILI—32; 47 
DIAGONALS. : ...» LIT]—65, 124 
DIAMONDS. To Venus belong— ae XVI--28 
The abundance and cheapness of—should be determined 
from the Kuravaka trees. sa XXIX--8§ 
Ulkas resembling— we) MX XITI-—-10 
Meena presides over—~ vas XLI~8 


The king should proceed adorned with— me XLIV+-27 
A pillar that is octagonal is called a— ss LIUl—28 


INDEX 75 


One’s feet and palm marked with figures of — LXIX~—29 ; 
LXX—2; LXXX—2, 4, 6, 8, 11, 12, 14, 15, 17, 18 ° 
DIGBALA. ‘a II—(14) 
DIGITS. L—11, 16, 17; LVIII—2, 43; LXXIX—8 
DIGNITY. we) LXXXV—-7 
DILL. ee i145 
DIMPLE. se LVIII-—9 
DIRECTION. LI--1, 6; LIX—-7; LXXXVI-—-59 
DIRECTORS. a LIWI—9 
‘DIRT. aa XCV—41 
DIRTY FELLOWS. .. XVI—32, 36 
DISAFFECTION., . LXXVITI--7 
DISASTER,—to the world. or XXIV—28 
There will be many—~s. mee XXIV—29 
Dust appearing prominently at Sunrise augurs 
terrible-— we NXXVITI—5 
When a kingdom is afflicted with—s. we XLVITI—83 
Whun the querist leaves off his cloth from his body, 
it denotes the befalling of a— ee Li--12 
—iS near. LANNIX—25; XCV-—8, 13 
A jewel with bad qualities forebodes— sek LXXX—1 
DISCOLOURATIQN OF GOLD. we =) XCVIT—13 
DISCOLOURED. ai “Ey RN-=)5 
DISCORD.—bet ween the king’s troops and the citizens, IX—23 
There will be—among friends. ae b Gags 0 
Sowers of — ae XV—4 
—will prevail among friends and powerful families, XVI[——4 
DISC. sae V-—-2 
DISCUS.-—es made of bamboo. ues XLIV—-5 
The left arm of the image of Lord Vishnu has a— LVIII-—-35 
DISEASE.—will break out among cattle, Jes IV—-11 
People will suffer from— IV--29; IX—18 


There will be out-break of ~s. V-~56, 82, 92; VI—2; VII 
-~-Z; I—2Z3, 33, 43, 44; XI—48 

All creatures will be afflicted with—s. VII—5; VIIT —4, 17, 32 

There will be danger from—=s. VII—7; VIII—51; 


SL--7; LIJI~60 


76 


INDEX 
Mercury engenders fear and | Ss VII—16 
Risk from—s, cai VITI—34 
Affliction caused bys “iat VIII-~42 
Destruction of people by—s. a IX—40 
—s of the throat will prevail. ae IX—-42 
Fatal—s will break out. 05 XI—29 
Kapalaketu causes—s. ae XI-—-31 
Through Chalaketu, countries suffer from—s .. XI--37 
A king to be free from all——s, ee XIT—18 
Agasthya causes—s. ae XII—z20 
People to suffer from— sa XVI--41 
Desolation by— ee XVII—-5 
Bilious—s will prevail. de XIX—9 


The Direction in which the non-luminaries are seen 
after their emergence from the Sun will be 


afflicted with— Ss XX—1 
Impending—may be guessed from the Kutaja feats XXIX—-12 
Trouble from—s. ae. RAMOS TF 
An earthquake in Indra’s circle produces—1in the 

face. we) MXXIT—18 
Rahu causes— we) = XXXIV-—15 
A rainbow seen in the middle of water causes— XXXV—5 
A yellow mock Sun produces .. MXXVIT—2 
Yellow flags hoisted in the town lead to— ... XLIUI-—-27 
Wagtail perched on filth,—will break out. ... XLV--8 
Trees producing a weeping sound,—s will prevail. XLVI-—-25 
If honey flows from trees, there will be— __... XLVI—~27 
Untimely rain foretells— XLVI--38 
Seasons not functioning properly echuiew | 

fear of--- tut XLVI-—-39 
When stationary objects mve, it forebodes—... XLVI—61 
Subjects will be free from——s. gu XLVII—5 
When the querisi is standing on hair, husk, bone or 

ashes, he will be afflicted with— ee: LI—14 
When the idol is of shorter limbs, the sculptor ; 

will suffer from— sie LVILI—50 
An image damaged by a hole causes—s._... LX~6 


Handle with ten joints brings on-~ ia LXXII-~-5 


INDEX 77 


Betel dispels—s arising from the phlegm. ... LXXVII--35 


Feminine—s, we LXXVITE—%3 
—s ensue from the use of couches and seats made 

from forbidden trees. bes LXXIX—5 
A cot made of Asana destroys—s, . LXXIX—11 


When cutting the tusk, if figures like monkeys, 


chamelions and serpents appear——s will arise. LXXIX--24 
The blemish Vatsanabha gives rise to danger 


from-— ws  LXXIX-~—-36 
A king wearing a snake-gem will never suffer 
from— ..  LXXXII—6 
If dogs bark very loud in seasons other than the 
monsoon, there will be—s, -. LXXXIX—6 
Cows burrowing the earth with their hoofs indicates, XCII—1 
The country will be afflicted with—s. nae XCV—5 
If a crow caws holding in its mouth a bone, diseases 
will arise. sich XCV—40 
A person born in Punarvasu will be afflicted with— CI—4 
Saturn in the 5th house will engender a fell— CIII—5, 7 
DISEASE OF TREES. 38% LV—14 
DISH. ses XVI—28 
DISHARMONY. bac V—97 
DISIKARA. . LUXXXVITI—45 
DISPELLER OF SINS. .. XULVITI—52 
DISPUTANTS. sae XVI—39 
DISSENSIONS.—among royal councillors, ine XVII-—4 
--with one’s beloved persons. .- LXXXIX—I1 
DISTILLERS: see XV—-22 
DISTRESS. Meteors that whirl round in the sky 
indicate— . ASAXITI—11 
Thoughts about a person in— ih LI—16 
Helping enemies in their— is LXXV—9 
When a dog howls producing the sound of “ Au” 
"it indicates— . LXXXIX—15 
——, and freedom from— sae XC—9, 10 
DITI, ‘ XLVIII— 68; LIII-—45, 49, 54 
DIURNAL, gas LXXXVI—-6 


DIURNAL CREATURE. LXXXVIi~-24, LUXXXVHI-1, 3 


78 . | INDEX 
DIVINE NATURE. .. LXVII—111 


DIVISHTAS. ~ XIV--31 
DIVYA. we LXXXVIII-—9 
DIVYAKA. ... LXXXVIII—18 
DOG. se II—(18) 
If—s are reluctant to leave the house, there will be 
rainfall soon. sag XXVITI-9 
When-stand on the roofs of houses, or bark looking 
towards the heavens, we. =©>£XXVITI—10 
If a—sucks a calf. ei XLVI---56 
When-—s bring bones or parts of dead bodies to 
houses. at XLVI—71 
The sight of the dung of-—is destructive to wealth. LI—18 
A—indicating prosperity to the house. sate LXII—1 
Shanks resembling those of a-- bat LXVIII—4 
For omens,—need not be considered in 
Bhadrapada. wv LRXXVI—-27 
Peril from—s. .. LXXXVII—36 
Trouble from—s. ..» LXXXVII-—-39 
The whole of the LXXXIXth Adhyaya. 
Jackals are similar to—s. ve xC—!] 
If a bull be obstructed by—s. Su XCII-—-2 
DOG-EATERS eh LI—-5 
DOG’S FLESH. She IX—15 
DOMESTIC ANIMALS. Falling of Asani on— XXXII—4 
Increase of— site LXXII-—6 
—will suffer. sat XCV—19 
DOMINIONS, ae XLVI—18 
DONKEY.-—s will be destroyed. oe 1X— 40 
Saturn presides over—s. X VI--34 
If one collects—s in Kanya, he will get eran XLII—~—7 
Effect of a wagtail perched on a w= &LV-9 
Earth having the colour of a-— sue LIV—106 
A rock haviog the colour of a— mie LIV—109 
Cows having the colour of-— i LXI-—-2 
Goats bleating like— oe LXV—10 


Those whose faces and body are like those of— LXVIII—110 


inbEx 19 


The—is strong in the north. . LXXXVI—23 
The—is of no consequence in the winter season. LXXXVI—26 
Death of— - LXXXVII—44 
A-~standing ina place to the left of a traveller. LX XX VIII-—32 
Two crows standing on a— eae XCV—47 
DONKEY’S HAIR. sia LVII—7 
DOOR. <A holy house with a-— Soe XLIV-—4 
Falling of a—or—bolt. it ALVI—74 
Height of—s. . ee LITI-—24 
Width of— oe LIII--25 
The two side-frames of the— se LITI--26 
Effect of —being at LIII—71, 72, 73, 75, 76, 79, 82; LVI—14 
DOOR-KEEPERS. ae LVI—14 
DOUBLE FACETS. ous LXXX~—15 
DOUBLE HEAD. .»  LXVITI—80 
DOVE. Effect of a—sitting on the king’s banner. XLIII—62 
In the vicinity of-—s. see XLVIII—6 
Excreta of-—s. bag L255 
—s are strong in the South. we LXXXVI—~Z21 
~—sitting or building a mest on a vehicle. wo LLXAAVILI—12 
DOWNSIDE. ei LIX—7 
DRAVIDA. Venus destroys thes bee IX-—-15 
The-—s are situated in the south west and stand 
under Swati. aa XIV-—-19 
The Sun presides over the eastern half of the— XVI-—-2 
Mars presides over people:‘living in— shi XVI—I11 
-—gs will be affected. wie AXXII—~15 
DRAVIDA COUNTRY. The people of the—will 
be affected. wee 1V-~-23 
A measure prevalent in the ean LVITI—4 
DRAVYA. ; aes I—7 
DRAVYAVARDHANA, wv LXXXVI-—-2 
DREAD, a VIII-—37 
DREAMS. sas II—(15) 
DREKKANA, - II—(14) 


DRESS.—should conform to the practices prevailing 
in the country. ree LVIII—29 


80 inbrx 


One of the excellences of women is charming— LXXVIII—13 


DRINKERS. he XV—3 
DRINKING. One fond of— ei CI—7 
Addicted to— ar CIUu—12 
DRINKS.—precribed for the sword. wey L235 
If—, fruits, etc., are sighted at the time of query. LI-—36 
Pimples on the neck lead one to— con LII-—3 
If one gets—-when thirsty. .» LXVIITI—116 
Horses that willingly take to their-and bit ... XCIII-—9 
DRIZZLE. ee XXI-—-37 
DRONA. we = XAI—32, 34 
DROUGHT. Inthe Moon’s Parvan, there will be— WV—20, 23 
—will break out _ VI-—-2 
“When Mars begins his direct motion after Asimusala, 
there will be-—— Lee VI-—5 
People will suffer from— ... VI--8; VIT--3 
In Margasira year of Jupiter, there will be— VIilI—4 
If the colour of Jupiter be smoky, there will be— VITI~18 
In Prabhava, there will be—in some parts. ... VILI—28 
When Venus is in Hasta, there will be— ... IX—30 
When Mars is in advance of Venus, people will 
suffer from— sek IX—41 
When Saturn stays in Moola, he brings about— KZ 
Kapalaketu causes—— ee XI—31 
Agasthya causes —when he is russet. sis XII--20 
In consequence of—, country-people will frequent 
towns and rivers. ae XVI—42 
Certain configurations that bring— aks XX—2 
Danger of—should be fore-told from the Nichula 
tree. bas XXIX—~12 


Time when the Sun's rays bring about ... XXX—9, 12 
Ash-coloured rays of the Sun brir ; about ,.. XXX—14 


Twilight containing clouds in-inauspicious forms 
occasions—— see XXX-—~21 


People will be troubled by— .. XXXII-98 
Meteors that cause— XXXILI--12 
A rainbow seen in the middle of water causes  XXXV—-5 
The fall of an ornament augurs— ..  XLIH—64 


INDEX 


—foretells famine, 


8] 
XLVI—38 


If Ketu touches Aslesha, there will certainly be— XLVII— 12 
When Saturn passes thro the ‘ Front or Eastern 


gates and is retro grade there will be— ... 


Regions where—will never be experienced 

If during a--dogs plunge in water 

A country to be afflicted with— 

Ants laying eggs on water bespeak— 
DROWNING. 
DROWSINESS, 
DRUGGISTS. 
DRUMS, 

DRY. 

DRY BONE. 
DRY GRASS. 
DRYING UP. 
DUCKS, 
DUEL. 
DUELISTS. 
DULL. 
DUNDUBHI. 
DUNG. A bull that makes too much— 

A horse that passes urine and—frequently 

DUNG OF ELEPHANTS, 
DUNG OF GOATS. 
DURMUKHA. 

DURMATI, 
DURBALI. 


DURBALIKA. igs 


XLIII—34; 


XLVI[—13 
LIV--111 
LXXNIX—7 
XCV--5 
XCV—59 
XC-——8 
XCIII—5 
IX=-32 
LXXXVIT—12 
LXVIII—60 
LXXXIX—T(d) 
LI-—4 
XLVI— 87 
XLVITI-—-9 
AV-—23 
XVI-36 
Cl--4 
VIII-—-50 
LXI —7 
XCIII—14 
LI~—18 
LV—17 
VITI-—38 
VITI—48 


LXXXVII[—~28, 29 


LXXXVITI—7 


DURVA GRASS. The growth of sugarcane is presaged 


by the flowers of the— 
Karkataka presides over— 


XXIX--13 
XLI a 4 


. If an ant-hill covered with—be to the south of a 


Tilaka tree. 


DURVASAS. 
DURVINEETA. owe 
DUSHTALANGALA. ove 


B.S. ll. 


LiV=37 
XLVITI—-65 
ALVII-—-65 

IV—-10 


82 
DUST. 


INDEX 


NAXVITI—1I, 


» The quarters will be afflicted with— 


The sky will be covered with a dense mass of — 


If on a day there be rain with— 


When the Sun’s rays disappear and eae isa 


strong gale raisin ;— 
If birds bathe in water or-— 
Smoke produced without— 
A twilight spoiled by— 
A-—is 8 times an atom 


If a crow bathes in 


The quarters filled with - 


The—that is raised by the hoofs of the cows... 


DUST-STORMS. 1I—(18); V—63: 


3, 4, 53, 6 7, 8 
IX—-41 
XTX--20 
XXII—6 


NAVIT—5 

‘ XXVILF--13 
XLVi=21 
XLVII-—-27 
LVIT[—2 
XCV—-16 
XCVIH~13 
CLIf-—-13 


NX[—-25; XXII—4 


DUTIES. XV—10 
DWADASAMSA. 1I—(14) 
DWADASI. CV—16 
DWAIDHA. 1I—(15) 
DWAIPAYANA. XLVIII—67 
DWARFED. LXVII—9 
DWIPA. XIV—14 
DWITA. XLVIMI—65 
DYE. LXXVIE—1 
DYER. LXXXVII—17, 41 
DYSENTERY. XXXII~18 
DYUNA. li— 


i 


EAGLE. Effect of an-~sitting on the king’s Banner, XLI[I—62 
When-—s appear to be weeping, denger has to be 


apprehended. 
Previous birth may be deduced when one’s face 
- resembles that of an eagle. 


ALVI-~—68 


LXVIII-—-103 


INDEX 33 


® 
Effect of a figure of an-—appearing in the tusks 


of elephants. .. LXXIX—e4 
EAKSHANIKA. we LXXXVI-~-32 
EAR.~~s belong to the masculine class of limbs ... LI—8 
When the querist touches the — - LI-—34, 39 
Effect of pimples on the-s, aa LII--3 
The~of the House God. ae LITI——-52 
Length of the--in Idols. .. LVIII—5, 6 
The tip of the— as LVIIlI-—7 
Distance between the eye-corner and the— ... LVII—8§ 
Bulls that have erected—s. Se LXI-—10 
A bitch having hanging—s. its LXII—2 
A horse with short—s see LKVI—1 
Hairy circle on the—s of horses. ae LXVI—3 
Elephants that have slender—s. bie LXVII—3 
Elephants that have broad—s. sate LXVII—7 
Lean and blank——s in men lead to a treacherous 
death. .. LXVUHI—58 
The—s of the Jaghanya class of men. eae LXIX-—33 
_ The—s of damsels. sas LXX—9 
Unequal—s in women. ae LXX—2l 
If Elephant’s—s stop beating suddenly. 5a XCIV—12 
A crow passing near the —of a traveller. ies XCV—25 
EAR DISEASE. 3 IX—33 
EAR LOBES.—belong to the masculine class of limbs. LI-—9 
The boring of the— sa C6 
EAR RING. Dents ‘resembling— as L-—-2 
Baladeva should wear an— ..  LVIlI-36 
The Sun-God's face is adorned with —s. we =~=LVITI--—47 
Marks of an—on the feet. - LXX—10 
EARLY MORNING. sa XLV-—-10 
EARTH,-—becomes levelled up by the rivers. —«.. IX—24 
22 comets who are children of the be XI—13 
The—is converted into an ocean as it were ... XXVIII—22 
The—when shaken by the winged mountains... XXXII—3 
When a wind dashes against the we =) KA XIX 1 


An offering cooked rice showld be made to the XLVI—37 


84 INDEX 


If one scratches the—with his big toe, ~ LI—13 
When the—emits a loud sound. aes LIV—54 
Where the—is soft, low, sandy. = LIV~9] 
Where in a forest tract, the—goes down being 

trodden upon. es LIV—93 
A piece or—that has the colour of the Sun ... LIV—106 
Effect of the lustre born of the element— .... LXVI1[—90 
Variety of gems is caused by the characteristic 

qualities of the— es LXXX—3 


* The bursting of the~reveals its effect in a fortnight.XC VII—9 
EARTH-QUAKE, I—(18); IV—12; V—63, 92; xxIv—25 
Wher. Mercury is beaten by Jupiter, there wil] 
be an— _ X VII—16 
—-is one of the indications for the miscarriage of foetus. XXI— 
25; XXXIf—1, 10, 14, 18, 22, 23, 24, 28, 29: 
XXXINI—12; XCVI~S5 


EARTH'S REVOLUTION AND ROTATION ... I1—(12) 
EARTHY NATURE. . ULXVII—109 
EAST. . LXXXVII~] 
EAST COAST, sa V—65 
EASTERN GATES. . XLVU—~13 
EFASWAKA., ns VIII—33 
EATABLIES. The Moon presides over— ees XVI—8 

Should worship the Gods, etc., with— - XLVIII—28 

Effect of a dog hiding— .. LXXXIX—-]3 
EBONY. «. DLXXIX—1] 
EBONY TREE. veh XXIX-~3 
EBULLITION, a XLVI—49 
ECHO. XC~12 


ECLIPSE, I—(10); V—2, 17, 18, 24, 35, 43, 92 XLII—1; 
XLVI —82; XLVIII~-83; LXXXI—20; * xCyvw—2 


When a lunar mansion is merged inan— ... XV—31 
EDIBLES. sea XCV=—24 
EDUCATION, «»  XCVIII-+-9 
EFFORTS, ie XLVI—65 


EGGS, een XCY—59 


INDEX 85 


EKACHARANAS. eee XIV—31 
EKANAMSA. sii LVILI-—37 
EKAPADAS. ae XIV—7 
EKAPUTRAKA. .» LXXXVITI--6 
EKATA. .» XLVILI—65 
EKAVALI. »- LXXXI-—-36 
ELDERS. Those who are devoted to their— XV--8; LXIX— 
29; CIII—6 
One ought not to sleep above— ~ LITI—124 
ELEMENTS, ». LXVIII—108 
ELEPHANT. II—(18); XIX—3; LXVII—1, 2, 3, 4,5, 6, 7,9, 10 
~—s will suffer. V—33; XVII—26 
—-s will be destroyed, .. V-—-66; IX—40 
Trouble to—s., se V—72 
Wars among-—s. i IX-~—-38 
Atmospheric Ketus are seen on— ake XI—4 
To Hasta belong—s, =e XV—11 
To Uttarashadha belongs. rs XV—19 
Mars presides overs. ek XVI—14 
To Jupiter belong—s. fa XVI—23 
To Venus belong—s. coe XVI—-27 
~—s will flourish. Gis XVITI—5 
Earth to be teeming with—~=s. sce XIX—14 
Sky covered with—s in the form of clouds ... XXIV—17 
Value of—s, ses XXVI-—8 
Clouds rising like thes. Sui XXVII—3 
Price of—s, nd XXIX—7 


Clouds having the shape of an-—-_ ...XXX-——-27; XX XIII—10 
Some opine that the earth-quake is the result availed 

of by the—s of the Quarters. os XXXTI—1 
Thunderbolt falling on—s. ae XXXITI—4 
Earth will drink in plenty the blood of... XXXVI—5 
In the 3rd watch of the night,—will be destroyed. XXXIX—5 
If the tree trunk is felled down by—s. is ALIT[—28 
Sound similar to that of a group of—s. po XLII—34 
Fire resembling an-— cise ALIII—35 
Fire having smell of —’s ichor. bee XLII—36 


INDEX 


Lustration should be performed for—s. XLIV—1, 15, 18, 20 
A king with—s in a jolly mood will conquer the 


whole earth, ee XLIV-—28 
Wagtail on the heads of—s. see XLV—5 
——s after ablution will be free from illness. ... XLVIII—®& 
Acquisition of—s. ae L 17 
Sword having the smell of —’s ichor. Ses L-~21 
For acquisition of money, one should drink the 

milk of an-- — L-—-24 
Should have eaten the flesh of an—_ a LI—34 
The Kunyjara is shaped like the back of an— LVI~—25 
Indra has a white four-tusked— Se LVITi—42 
The lord of Siva’s hosts has an—ine face. ... LVIII—58 
Kings have arms that are like the trunks of — LXVIII—35 


A person with a palm bearing the figure of an— LXVIII—45 
The gait of kings resembles that of an intoxicated ~LXVIII-—115 
A man with arms resembling the trunk of an— LXIX—10 
Gait like that of a lordly— tee LXIX—14 
One’s body smelling like the ichor of an— ... LXIX—16 
Qne’s hands and feet to be marked with the 


figures of-—s, aa LXIX—17 
Thighs similar to the trunks of—s. ves LXX-—3 
Damsels who have on their soles marks of-~s, LXX—10 
Trees thrown down by—s. sus LXXIX—3 
To see a rutting— ay LXXIX—7 
—’s tusk is highly commended. »»-LXSIX—19, 20 
The word Gem is applied to—s, “vs LXXX-—2 
Pearls are got from——s. LXXXI—1, 20, 29 
The—is strong in the East. ws» LXXXVI—20 
The-~should‘not be considered in Sravana. ... LXXXV1—27 
One will obtain an— ~s LXXXVII—17 
Death of one’s—s, we LXAXXVII—42 
If a dog passes urine on an— ww. LXXXIX—1(a) 
Jackal’s cry being re-echoed by—s, es XC—12 
—'s tusk, -» MCIV—1, 7, 8 
—having a stumbling gait. sae ACIV—12 


—breaking ant-hills, trees, etc., =~  XCIV--13 


INDEX 82° 


—-dragged into water by @ crocodile. 7 XCIV—14 
ELEPHANT CATCHERS. aay x79 
ELEPHANT CAVES, ' eee XIV—16 
ELEPHANT DRIVERS. XV—11; XVI--27; LXXXVII—17, 42 
ELEPHANT YARDS. ks ‘XLV—5 
ELEPHANTINE »» LXVIIT—65 
ELEPHANTINE HEADS, bes LXV~-65 
ELK, bes LXV—2 
ELOQUENT. es Cr--3 
EMBRACING. we LXXIV—19 
EMBRYOS. XXI-—18, 27, 29, 31, 32, 33, 35, 37 
EMERALD. LXXX—4, LXXXIII—1 
EMINENCE. ...V—--36; LXXV—10 
EMINENT PERSONAGE. we XCVI—10 
EMPEROR. An—will meet with his end. son AI—-58 

A person weighing one Bhara and a half will 

be an— + LXVIITI—106 

If one’s height and extent of outstretched arms be 

each 105 digits, he would be an— Ses LXIX—18 
EMPTY. Sieg XCV—58 
EMPTY POTS. ise LI—~28 
ENCAMPMENT. he XCV—45 
ENCHANTMENT. saa XIX—1L0 
ENCOUNTERS. There will be hostile—between 

monarchs, es XVII—5 

Sannipata or— sie XX—-8 
END. . . ASLVIT~1k, 24 
ENEMIES. Conflict with the— A V—84 

One will conquer the entire host of his— ee XII—18 

Kings will smash the— oes XIX—17 

The city will be captured by the— ua XXX—5 

Danger from— — XXX-—-23 

An: invasion by an we KXXITI~12 

Menace of— ies. we | XXXVI-—4 

Indra put the host of—-to death, sai XLIVW—7 

Destruction. of the ..  XLIIT-60 


One will not have any trouble from his— .... XLILI-—68 


88 INDEX 
" One appears dreadful to the hosts of his— ... XLIV—28 


« One to subjugate his—before long. bat XLV—t11 
Attaik by a foreign— ve XLVI—48 
Defeat at the hands of one’s ~— sat XLVI-—61 
Places occupied by— bee LI—5 
Destruction of — LII—5; LXXII-—-6 
Clever in killing one’s—- ve LX!X--38 
Helping one’s—in their distress. ‘iv LXXV—9 
A cot made of sandal wood destroys one’s—... LXXIX~—12 
A good diamond destroys the owner’s — + L&XX—18 
A king wearing a snake-gem will extirpate his-—- LXXXII—6 
Sami and Arjuna destroy one’s— »» LXXXV—6 
Association with one’s— .. LXXXIX—13 
Condivion when one’s—will be killed. bai XCIIIl-—7 
Destruction of one’s—is assured. pe XCIV—11 
Increase of— ae? XCV—9 
Trouble from— sai XCV—10 
War with the— ar XCV-—46 
Friendship between deadly— ww. KCVIT~12 
Success in ruining one’s— ..  XCVIII—8 
Things done in Vishti lead ore to attack— ... C-—4 
Rahu creates— Sas CIII—-4 

ENERGETIC. sa LXIX~-36 
ENERGETIC MEN. _ XVI—38 
ENJOYMENTS. re LXXI—I11 
ENTERING A HOUSE. sae LII—125 
ENTRANCES. se LItI—70 
ENTRY. .. MCVITI—-17 
ENVIOUS nae CI-9 
ENVOYS. a 1I—(15) 
' Mercury presides over — eee XVI—19 
~—will be happy. we | CU KIX—12 
Fire seen in the southwest bodes evil to— _..... XXXI-—-3 
Measure of the houses of — AS LUI-~9 
The quarter owned by— . LXXXVI-—-34 


EPIDEMICS. Outbreak of —~ V—58; VIH--47; XLVI-—40 
When dogs bring bones to houses,—-will. be the result. XLVI—~71 


INDEX 89 


ERCTrIC BLISS. ww. LXXIV—18 
ERY5IPELAS. se XXXII—14 
ESHYAT SURYA. .» LXXXVI-12 
ESTATE. w» LXXXVII—45 
ETHER. we =>6 LX VITI-—-93 
EUNUCHS.~—~belong to Dhanishta. nie XV~—Z21 
Mercury presides over-- ie XVI—-19 
Saturn presides over— es XVI--32 
When Venus is defeated by Jupiter,-—will suffer 
severely. . ie XVII—22 
~~will be happy. sas NIX—12 
EVACUATE.—s the, bowels. beg LI—27 
EVEN NUMBER. ai LXXII-~—5 
EVENING. ‘ae XLV—10 
EVENING TWILIGHT. Sos XLVIIi—21 
EVIL. Fore bodes-—to XXX-—16; XXXI-3, 4; XLV—-10 
Ward off all-s. ww. NL VITI—49 
EVIL CONSEQUENCES. sd XLVII—15 
EVIL DOERS. . XVI-~-5, 36 
EVIL OMEN. LI—35, 38; LUI--59 
EVIL SYMPTOMS. ae XLIX-—-8 
EXALTATION.—sign. ve LXIX—1 
EXCELLENCES. .. LXXVIII—13 
EXCESSIVE RAIN. ae XLVI—38 
EXCREMENTS. ae XLV--12 
EXCRETA.—of doves. re L-~25 
Omens that pass-~or eat their food. .. LXXXVI-—-—-62 
lf a crow passes-- oo SOV—I]4, 44 
EXIT FROM IFTHE WORLD. sea li—(14) 
EXORCISERS. Mercury presides over-~- eas XVI--19 
To Jupiter belong-~- se XVI— 24 
EXPIATION. os XLVIII-—2 


EXPIATORY CEREMONIES.-—should be performed 
to ward off evil consequences. XLVI-—3, 17, 24, 53, 81, 


XCVII—17 
EXPIATORY HYMNS. he ALIV—20 
EXPIATORY RITES, nee ALIX—8 


BS. 12, 


90 INDEX 


EXPLOSION. XLVI—86 
EXPULSION. XLVI—58 
EYES. An eagle sitting on the king’s banner will 

deprive him of his— XLITI--62 

—belong to the neuter class of limbs. LI-~—9 

Pimples on the— LII—2 
Agni and Diti are situated on the--of the FTcitée: 

God. .» LITI-52, 54 

—of an idol. LVIII~—7, 8, 10, 11, 13, 36 

Cows with rough— LXI—2 

Bull with cat’s— LXI—6 

Bull with tremulous—- . LXI--9 

Bull with—hued like the beryl. LXI-—-14 

Bull with tawny or copper-coloured— LXI—17 

Bull with red— LXI—18 

A dog with—like a bear’s. LXII—1 

A bitch with—surrounded by white rings. LXII—2 

A hen with beautiful— LXIII—3 

A goat with red— LXV—6 

A horse with long sockets of— LXVI—1 

A horse with hairy circles under the— LXVI--2 

Men with—resembling the petals of a lotus .... LXVIII—~—64 

A laughter accompanied by closed— LAVIII---74 

It Jeads to the happiness of men to have red——- LXVII[I—87 

Gloss is to be observed in— -» LAVITI—101 

EYE BROW. If at a query a woman touches her— LI—37 

Pimples on the two-—s. LII-~2 

Tremblings of thes, we LXXVITII--3 

EYE CORNERS. Bulls having red—s. LXI—~12 

Tt leads to happiness of men to have red— LXVIII-~—87 

EYE DISEASE. LI—11 

EYE LASHES. LXI—~14 


EYE LIDS. 


LII-—~2 


INDEX 91 


F 
FACE. If Rahu is to be distinguished by his tail and—~ V—5 
A king should not see his own—in the sword ... L—6 
A mole on the—of ladies. as L-—9 
~~-belongs to the neuter class of limbs. ai LI-—9 
Pimples on the back of the— ne LIl-—2 
House-God has Apa on the—~ oP LITI—51 
The Sun-God’s—is adorned with ear rings. .... LVILI—47 
The—of the idol. .. LVITI—15 
Brahman should have four-~s. .»  LVIII-—41 
The lord of Siva’s hosts has an elephantine — LVIII—58 
Cows with drooping ahs LXI—3 
A white cock with red— og LXIII—1 
A hen with beautiful—and eyes. ise LXITI—3 
A horse with fine— wey LXVI--l 
Elephants that have a long and broad— .»  LUXVII—6 


One’s previous birth should be deduced from the—LXVHI—103 
The face of a Bhadra class man will be tiger—like. LXIX—14 


A Hamsa class man has a red— we LXITX—24 

Horses are pure at the— . .. DLXXIV—8 

Flame appearing in the horse’s—leads to victory. XCIII——2 
FACIAL DISEASES. ti VI—4 
FACIAL LUSTRE. .» LXXVII—34 
FAILURE. LXXXVI—61, 62 
FAITHLESS MEN. sine XVI—36 
FAKIR. ae LI-—21 
FALL. eo LIX—13 
FALL FROM TREE. e» DLXVIIT--50 
FALLING DOWN. or XCIII—5 
FALSE FIRE,—in the quarters is one of the indications 

for the miscarrying of the foetus. XXI—25; XXIV—-25 
FALSE-HEARTED. rr XV—~23 


FAME. To Jyeshta belong those that are endowed with—XV-~16 
Should a king perform the Pushyasnana, he would 
get increased— ee XLVITI--82 


92 INDEX 


A good hen brings abundance of wealth,—and 


. victory to kings, aes LXIII-—3 
FAMILIES, When Saturn is in Jyeshta,—come to grief. X—13 
Ruin befalls the country and the— fig XLVI—52 
One’s thoughts to be about one’s— a LI-—-23 
An image that is hurt by a wedge destroys the— LX-—6 
Westruction of one’s— LXVIII—3; LXXII—5 

A long neck for a woman leads to the annihilation 
of her -- oe LAX—-18 
Ruin of one’s— ue LXXIX-—5 
Wholesale ruin of the royal— as XCIV—10 


FAMINE. IV—14, 16, 21; V---23, 27, 54, 61, 71, 92; VI-—9; 
VII—16; VITI—19, 40; TX—14, 41; X--—2, 20; XI—13, 
30, 31,.36;. “AXT1—20, 22+. XVil-=5;" AX—1,25 
XXX—28; XXXITI—12; XXXIV-—15, 16; XXXV 
—4; XLVI—27, 38; XLVII—4, 13, 16; LVIII 
“50; LXXIX—24, LXXXVI—65; XCV-—2, 


7, 8, i 
One should guess--from the growth of Khadira 
and Samee trees. Se XXIX-~11 
FAMOUS. A person born in Krittika will be CI—2 
A person born in Sravana will be— a CI-——12 
Saturn in the 3rd house at the time of a girl's 
marriage makes her-— athe CIm—3 
FAN, ve LXX—10 
FAT. A sword with the smell of cow’s—- ‘a L—-21 
—jis one of the seven vital substances in the human 
body. ..  DLXVIJI-96 
The effect due to a shower of—- comes to pass on 
the same day. so: XCVII—10 
FATHER. The thief will happen to be his— ... LI—26 
—-§ of many sons. w.  LXVILI-24 
FAULTS. a LXXV—8 
FAVOURABLE. LXXXVI—36, 37, 40, 44 
‘FAVOURABLENESS. we LXXVITI—13 
FAVOURITE. 02 LXXXV—-7 


FEAR.—to the whole mankind, ‘ haces Ju—S5 


INDEX 93 


~-to be apprehended frdém kings. a ITI-—29 
If the Sun should be without rays, it indicates-~ ItI-—-31 
There will be—infused among people. a IlI-—35 
There will be peril, hunger and— wee IV-~21 
When Mercury passes through any of the 5 asterisms 
commencing from Ardra, there will be — VII-—3 
When Mercury’s motion is weak, he engenders—- VII—16 


If Mercury be visible in certain months, he will cause —VIT—17 
In the Bhadrapada year of Jupiter, there will be— VIII~13 


People wil! be free from fear. es VIII—30, 32 
—among the Brahmin class. — VITI-—52 
There will be—in some places. >is IX—20 


If Venus be visible before Sunset he will cause some— IX—-23 


If Venus and Jupiter be in exact oppsition and in the 
East and West, people will be oppressed with fear, [X-—37 


If Agasthya should be throbbing, there would 


be—engendered. XII—20 
Anything issuing from the Sun or the Moon eee 
by an earthquake causes drought and— XXXI—12 
When a halo is smoky in colour there will be—- XXXIV~—6 
If a crow cries at night, there willbe—_... XCII—2 
When a crow stands on a Stone, there will be fear. XCV—42 
If a crow cries as ‘guda’, there will be fear. XCV—54 
FEAST. ae LXXXV—6 
FEATHERS, LXUI—1; LXXIHW—1 
FEEBLE CHARACTERS. = XV—13 
FEET.—belong to the masucline class of limbs... LI—8 
If the querist scratches the —with his hand, it is 
about a maid servant. Ses LI-~13 
A goat with white— 38 LXV—6 
A goat with blue— | Mei LXV—~—8 
Elephants having slender— sii LXVII—3 
A king’s—~do not perspire. _ LXVIlU—2 
Poverty produced by one’s— eee LXVIII—3 


To have-red-—leads to the happiness of men, LXVIII~—87 

One's—to be marked with the figures of ploughs, etc., LXIX——17 

A man belonging to the Hamsa blass has hand- ; 
some—— 3 LXIX—24 


94 , INDEX 


A man of Ruchaka type has his—and palms markéd 
; with figures, LXIX-—-29 
One to have—marked with a sword, Sakti, noose etc., LXIX—34 


To have—with tender and unsweating soles. LXX—2 
The—with ankle- joints represent the first stage 
of life. LXX—24 
Brahmins are pure at the LXXIV-—8 
If an omen passes by a person’— LXXXVI—67 
FELLOWSHIP. XX-—-7 
FEMALE. Union of the male and— LXXIV-—20 
A—will be born. LXXVI—1 
—creatures. LXXXKVI—9 
FEMALE ASCETICS. LXXVIII—9 
FEMALE BIRTH LXXVITI-—23 
FEMALE COMPANIONS. LXXVIII-—9 
FEMALE DEER. XLVILI—13 
FEMALE DISEASES. LXXVILI~13 
FEMALE FOLK. V—65 
FEMALE SERVANT, LI—21 
FEMININE DISEASES. LXXVIII—13 
FEMININE FACE. LXVIII—-55 
FEMININE LIMBS, LI~—8 
FEMININE NAMES. XLITI--14 
FEMININE QUARTERS. LXXXVI—-75 
FESTIVALS. .» DUXXVIIT—I11 
FESTIVITIES.—will be the order of the day, ... VITI-—~-36 
—are strong in the west. LXXXVI—22 
Stoppage of-— XCVII—5 
FEUD. LXXXIX-—3 
FEUDATORY CHIEFS. LIII—8 
FEVER. Outbreak of — XXXII—-10 
—will prevail. XXXII-—~—14 
FICKLE. A female who has—eyes. LXX—19 


A person to be— 
FICKLE-MINDED. 
FICKLE-MINDED FRIENDS, 
FIELD. 


LXIX~—~-20; CI—3 


LXVITI—113 
XV—13, 21 
XLVI—37 


INDEX ; 95 


FIELD-PRODUCTS. ae XXV—2 
FIG. S38 LV—10 
FIG TREE. XLIUL—-15; LIN -85; LIV—11, 18, 96, 107 
FIGHT. LXIi-~2; XCV—56 
FIGHTING. I{I-—-35; XCV-~-46 
FILLETS. sige LXXIII—5 
FILTH. me XLV-~8 
FINE ARIS. ws LXIX—8 
Asterisms that ere beneficial for-— ioe XCVIII—9 
FINE CORN, ses XV—10 
FINGER.~-s belong to the female class of limbs. LI—8 
When a-~is touched, ie Bel 11, 25,37 
Pimples appearing on thes. — LII—6 
Pimples on one’s—s cause imprisonment. ... LII—8 
Elephants with long—s. ba LXVII-—8 
Long-lived persons have long—s. ..  LXVIIT—36 
——s and poverty. ss LXVILI—43 
It leads to one's happiness to have slender—s LX VIII-—87 
FIRE. et XXXII-—~7 


Risk from-- V-—60; VIII--17, 19; IX—44; XXXIV—15; 
NLIVW--65; XLVI—19; LIV—97; 


To earn one’s livelihood through working on-~ VI—1 
Trees spoiled by Wind and— ve XLUI—13 
Trouble through— VII—1; VIIIl—47 
Outbreak of-—s, VIW—28; XVII-—17 
People living by and cows will suffer, ... VIII--3; X-—4 
There will be—caused by war. is VITI—42 
Destruction through-— Lae IX 41 
Comets born of -- Sis XI—11, 23 
The Sun presides over-— a xXVI—+4 
Mars presides over people who live by— ... AVI-—-13 
—g roused by the wind spread out. bem XIX—7 
Like a forest on— ves XXIV—15 
There will be raging of—s. XXIV—23; XXVI—13 
Blazing continuously with the flames of—... XXVII—2 


Peril from wind and— a XXVIII-—~21 


96 INDEX 


€ 


Madder-coloured rays of the Sun cause trouble 


through—s. or XXX—14 
The—in the quarters. ve XXXI—1 
—in the horizon. oH XXXIT~-13 


~-A rainbow that is yellow produces evils from— XXXV—4 
An aerial city resembling—destroys robbers 


and foresters. ve XXXVI-—3 
Oblations to the fire with hymns. er XLITI-—30 
If the fire be fragrant, etc,,X LITI-—31, 32, 33, 34, 35, 36, 37, 45 
Flames without— oe XLVI—18 
Temples burnt without— Soh XLVI— 20 
Smoke without— .. XLVI-—21, 75 
Portents of — sek XLVI—24 
Offerings io the-~ XLVI--51, 65; XLVITI-—77, 78 
To sleep above— a LIWI—124 
Earth having the colour of—is waterless. ... LIV—106 
Trees burnt by— or LIX--3 
The High Priests should recite in the South East 

Hymns relating to— ve LX— 11 
The symptoms of— be LX—12 
Lustres born of— es LXVIIT—92 


A man of the Ruchaka type will die by weapon or—- LXIX—30 
A triangular diamond of the colour of a tiger’s eye 

is presided over by— us » LXXX-9 
A diamond is similar to lightning,—or rainbow. LXXX-—-14 
A pearl having the brilliance af smokless—or the 

lustre of lotus is presided over by-—_... LXXXI--8 
An omen in the Burning quarte:s engenders 

danger from— . DUXXXVITI—31 
Peril from-— LXXXVII—40; LXXXIX—3; XC-—6; 

XCV—7, 18, 40, 56 

Out break of—, death from— LXXX— 43; LXXXIX—5, 6, 13 


Effect of flames without the existence of—— ... XCVII—10 
Effects of-— j ae XCVII—11 
Asterisms to be used for setting— se XCVIII—8 
FIKE £CIRCLE. XXXII--25, 27, 28 


FIRE PERIOD oe XXXII—24, 25 


INDEX 97 


FIRE-WOOD. Lightning falling on heaps of-— XAXILE—S5 
Omens seen on-~or ashes, we DLXXXVI—60 
Dog passing urine on— .. LXXXIX—I(b) 

FIRE WORSHIPPERS. aie LX-- 43 

FIRM-MINDED. ae CI-10 

FIRMNESS. we LAIX--38 

FIRST STOREY. me LILI-—-22 

FIRY DISPOSITION. + DLXVITI~-110 

FISH.—is assigned to Satabhishak, ee XV~-—-22 
Pouring down showers of — a XXI—-33 
A man to have eaten ~ ods LI—35 
—to be found in the earth. .» LIV—10, 15 
Men having the smell of-— .. LUXVILTI-15 
A palm with --tail figures, LXVITI—45 
A man of the Hamsa type has the marks of 2 a 

pair of-~ et LXIX-~-24 
One’s feet with the marks of-— ae TgXX=2, 10 

FISH'S YE. .. DLXXXI—23 

FISH PRODUCTS. his XLI-—8 

FISHERS. seu XVI-—-33 

FISHERMEN. The chief of the—will be killed... Al=55 
To Pushya are assigned— as XV—6 
To VPurvashadha are assigned — bes XV—18 
When the querist sees a— nee LZ] 
Danger from -- . LXXAVIT—-34 
To come in contact with— .. LXXXVIT—7 

FISHES. An eclipse in Makara will do away with— V—~—41 
Much tumblings of-—ashore. ie XXVIII--4 
When clouds resemble -in shape. .. SMAVITT -14 
Meteors resembling .. = SAXITT -10 
A door adorned with-— ae XLIV—4 
-- eating the meat of their own species. . LAXXVI—65 
One will come by-~ .. LXXXVII-—7 

FISTULA. obs LXIX-—~23 

FIVE CONCOMITANT SIGNS. 52k XXI[---37 

FIXED SIGN Navamsa. au LX--20 


FLACCID MUSCLES. .. LXXVILI—18 


98 iNDEX 


FLAG. A very fine—of black colour. se XXIV—-9 
To be adorned with beautiful-—s, set XLUI—25 
White—s hoisted in the town. sai Xx LITI-—-~27 
The fall of a— aie XLIII—64 
A door adorned with—s. bag XLIV-—4 
Wagtail perched on— hae XLV—-5 
The-—of the car being twisted. oe XLVI--9 
—-s burnt without fire. ae XLVI-—~20 
Falling down of a— A XLVI—74 
Deities to be worshipped with—s. + XLVIII—33 
Dents resembling a— an L-—-2 
One with a palm containing marks of—s, .... LXVIII—46 
Discolouration of—s. Te XCVII—-13 

FLAG-STAFF. Ketus seen on— sae XI-—4 
Indra gave a bamboo—to the king of Chedi... XLUI—8 

FLAMES.— without fire. XLVI-—18 
—foreboding danger. XLVI—22: XLVII-—10 

. If there be—on a worshippable tree. a XLVI--29 
If wells show— tel XLVI—49 
A lamp whose—is turned upwards. w+ LXXXIV-—1 
. “appearing in horses. XCIII—1, 2, 3, 4 
Effects of-—without the existence of fire. ... XCVII~10 

FLAMINGOES. ee LVI—5 

FLANKS. a LXVI-—3 

EBLAT. Sjaves possess—fingers, ws )=©)0d LD XVIULI-—36 
A—-nose indicates death at the hands of a woman. LX VIII—61 
One with a--head, .. LXVITI-~-79 

FLATTENED. Ag LXAXXK—16 

FLESH. To Bharani are assigned those that feed on— XV-—27 
Earth filled with masses of—and blood. aa XXVII-—-5 
Abstain from—for seven days continuously... XLV~—15 
If fire is observed on—, it indicates the king’s death XLVI—19 
If there be a rain of — S68 XLVI —40 
If rivers carry blood or— we)—lCURLVI-~-48 
Danavas, Daityas, etc., are to be worshipped 

with— .» XLVIII-~30 


A seed should be fumigated with the~of deer and hog, L.V-~20 


INDEX 99 


Upper part of the abdomen dry without— .... LXVIII—14 
is one of the 7 vital substance in the human body. LX VIII--—96 
One who has a well-developed body is termed— 


strong. 


LXVITI—100 


A limb without LXVIII-~-83 
A man with limbs and joints full of ~— LXIX—10 
—~is very good in the south. LXXXVI-~-45 
If a dog hides —or bones inside ashes. LXXXIX—~—13 

If a crow caws looking at the S. W., one will 
get-—and food. XCV—22 
If a crow caws holding—-in its mouth. X€vV—41 
FLESHY. LXX—17 
FLIES, Swarmed with— XCIT—2 
['ffects of — XCVII—7 
FLOCK. LXV—5 
FLOWER-—s. XLIII—-60 
Growth of—s. TI—(18) 
—s will wither. ous V—-24 
Red and yellow—s will grow in large quantities. VIII—3 
Magha represents the—of Samvatsarapurusha. VIlI-—~19 
When Satuin is in Pushya,—will suffer xX—6 
To Krittika are assigned white—s. XV-—1 
To Mrigasiras are assigned—s. og XV—3 
To Moola are assgined persons dealing ins... XV—17 


To Purvashadha and Revati are assigned aquatic 


friuts and- s. XV—18, 25 
The Moon presides over—s. XVI-—-7 
—gs belong to Venus. XVI—28 
By observing the abundance of—s, XXIX—1 
From the luxuriance of—s. XXIX—2 
Sign Vrishabha presides over—s. XLI-—3 

Sign Makara presides over— XLI—7 
Profit ins. XLII—8 
If trees yield—s out of season. XLVI—26 
Over-luxuriant growth of—s in a single tree . XLVI—34 
Abundant--s on trees. XLVI--85 
Jf—s are sighted at the time af a query, - LI—36 


100 . INDEX 


When-s of a tree are unnatural. , ide LIV—56 
If Kantakari be seen with white—s. i ae LIV—57 
‘ Tf Karn?kara bears white ~s. ae LIV—59 
For increasing the yield of-— se LV—18 
One will come by fruits and —s. w. LXXXVII--9 
One will obtain white—s .. LXXXVII—15 
One will get Naga and Punnaga s. we LNXXVIT-24 
If in the neighbourhood of a horse thai neighs 

there be —-s. aie XCIIT-—8 
If a crow strikes the bed with a— Me XCV=12 
When the crows mouth is filled with—s ... XCV —13 
A. crow perched on a tree with—~s, es XCV—-33 
If a crow caws holding in its mouth a white — XCV—41 

If a crows cries as ‘Pud’ there will be acquisition 
of—s. ae XCV—-55 
Appearance of—s and fruits out of season ... XCVII- -4 
To wear beautiful —s. ise CI—8 
FLUTE. 263 XIX—18 
FLUTTERING, oa XCV ~I1 
FLY. .. XCV—9, 10 
FODDER. see XCIII--9 
FOE. There will be great trouble from foreign-~s XX-—-3 
The king will vanquish his—if  XXX{TI—30; XLIV—-17 
Oppression by a— oe DLXXIX-—~-24 
Annihilation of one’s— ee LXXXV-—-6 
Contact with one’s— « LXXXVII--29 
FOETUS.-——es of clouds, sa XXI-~-22 
Miscarrying of the foetus. ae XXI-—~25 
es formed in the 6 months from Margasira. XXI-—-30 
Destruction of——es. : re XXI-~-—-34 


A woman develops a--similar to the man whom. LXXV-—lI 
A-situated on the right side of the womb... DULXXVIIT—24 


FOG. we =)COKXX~21 
FOLDS.-—in the belly—one of the feminine class of limbs LI-—8 
People with —in the belly. sa LXVIII-—~24 
Women with three-~and without hair, aes LXX-~-5 


FOLIAGE. Space ornamented with— dex LVI—~15 


, INDEX 101 


A turnip of very dark sie LVITI-—58 


FOOD. a XXI—1 
Abundance of -~ | V—80, 83; XI—29, 46, 48; XCV—6 
--will become costly. aa VILI-——8 
~-grains will be plenty only in some places ... VUI—13 
—will be in plenty for all. See VIII—14 
Abundant—grains. 1X—8, 20; XXXIII~10 
Plenty of- JX~—10; XI—14, 45; XVIII—4; XXIV - 20: 

XCV—2 
Plenty of—crops. ans IX-—-12 
Dearth of — sas XVIT--4, 5 
Moon confers plenty of-—when ae XVIlI—3 
Children procuring——for their parents ae XXIV—30 
Destruction of — XXX—30; LXXXVII—34 
Gift of cows,-—-and lands. .. &LVI—6, 46 
Decay of— sea XLVI—28 
When—loses the taste. me XLVI-—35 
Appearance of— or XLVI—-85 
lf--is sighted at the time of a query. = LI—36 
Acquisition of good— LIT-—3, 5, 6; XCV--—20 


A man is blessed if he gets—when hungry .... DLXVITI—116 
Quint-essence of a kingdom consists of dainty- LXXIV—17 


One cannot digest his -- a LXXIX—28 
Eating of good— sae LXXXV—6 
A tooth-stick bringing sumptuous— sad LXXXV—9 
When the omen is at the S. W. Spoke, one will 
obtain— LXXXAVII—22; XCV—14, 22, 23, 44 
Vitiation of— Si XCV—~53 
Extraordinary rise or fall in the price of —grains. ViI~—1 
Destruction of-—grains. V—38; XXXVILI—7 
Abundance of ~grains. XXIX--12; LXXXIN—10; XCV—4 
FOOLISH. | ies LXIX—9 
FOOT. Pimples on one’s-- ds LII—8 
One that has one—white. cet LXI—19 
A bitch with 6 nails on the left fore--- ae LXU—2 
If a dog smell the ~of a traveller. .. LXXXIX—12 


FOOT-PATH. A-~—outside a house, = LUI—20 


102 : INDEX 


FOOT-SOLDIERS. ; aug XIX-—3 
FORBIDDEN WOMEN. .. LXVIII-—3, 61 
FORCE. se C—5 
FORE ARMS. sae LVIII~-25 
FORE FINGER. LVII[—27; LXVITI--50 
FORE-FOOT. see LXII—1, 2 
FORE-HEAD. .. LVHI--5, 6, 46 
—belongs to the neuter class of limbs. see LI—10 
If the querist touches his— LI-—-30 
If a woman touches the middle or end of the: = LI—41 
Pimples on the — she LIii--3 
One hairy circle in the hair of the—of a horse. LXVI-—4 
An elephant that has a broad— Sas LXVII-—7 
A man with an uneven— ae LX VIII--70 
A man with five lines on the—- cue LXVITI—77 
A man with a broad— ai LXVIIT—85 
One with a beautiful— or LXIX~—15 
A-—~neither sunken, nor arched. aul LXX—8 
A woman with a—hanging over. wate LXX —20 
The—represents the tenth period of Ayus ... LXX-—26 
Smoke in the horse’s—and flame in the horse’s—lead toXCII—3 
FORELEGS. Hairy circles in the—of a horse... LXVI—3 
Smoke or flame in the—of a horse. i XCIII[-—3 
FORE-NOON. ws LXXXVI-48 
FOREIGN COUNTRY. ae CI-—9 
FOREIGN ENEMY. XLVI—20, 34, 38 
FOREIGN INVASION. XXXIII-—16; XXXVIII—6 
FOREST. Men living in-—s. sls V—39, 42 
Animals living in the-— er V—70 
To Pushya belong-—s. — ae XV-—6 
To Mrigasiras belong—ers. i XV—3 
—g infested witb tusked animals. aa. XIX—~1 
Violent fires cqnsume—s. i X1X—-7 
Sky looks like a—on fire. Ss XXIV—-15 
Decay of—s. ee XXXII—10 
Village birds roaming in the— a XLVI~-66 


Smoke in the--without fire, 5 XLVI~75 


inDEx 103 


—§ and mountains darkened with-—smoke ... XLVI~—93 
Royal ablution should be done in a—region .. XLVIIL—5,°7 
Water in a —tract. : LV 86, 89, 93 
Gods sport in the vicinity of—s. Mee, LVI—8 
A lover of—s: rr LXIX—20 
One meets his end in a— os LXIX-—-26 
Rural creatures found in —s, w. LXXXVI—24 
For entering—s. we LUXXXVE-—-50 
Bitches bringing forth their young one’s ina— + XCVII—8 
FORESTERS. ig TI—(15) 
Distress to the— ee IX—13, 15 
—are allotted to Sage Atri. es XIITI-—-10 
To Mrigasiras are assiguned— es XV—3 
Mars presides over— : fee XVI—13 
Destruction of — ag XXXVI-—-3 
Lord of — — LXIX—-23 
One will come in contact with— »» LXXXVII-10 
FORTS. ne XVI—6 
FORTUNATE. LXVIII—6, 36, 42, 99 
FORTITUDE. ae LXVIII— 
FORTNIGHT. .» XLVITI-359 
FORTRESSES. ai II—(15) 
The Moon presides over— sae XVI—6 
Mars presides over — va XVI—-13 
A lover of— . Sis LXIX—20 
FORTUNE, LU—2, 6; LItI-—92 
A long cheek gives ~ v»  DUXVIII—61 
Green eyes give— .»  LXVIT-—67 
A slit brings—to men. a ‘LXXI-—13 
Goddesses of— ..  LXXIV—-4 
Should examine the--of kings, ae LXXX—1 
is ensured by the use of val LXXXV—4 
Cows bring—to their owner. Te XCII—3 
FOWLERS. ‘To Satabhishek are assigned— ... XV—22 
Saturn presides over — ‘ie XVI-—-33 
Danger from— «» LUXXXVII—34 


FRAGRANT. on ALII-—31 


104 INDEX 


FRAGRANT FLOWERS. ist XV—25 
FRAGRANT LEAVES. ss XLI—4 
FRAGRANT THINGS. XV—3; XVI—28° 
FRAMES, ‘ bak LIlI—26 
FRESH RAIN, sha LXIX—16 
FRIED GRAINS.  XLII—36; XLVIII -35; LXXXVII—14 
FRIENDS Discord among -- X12; LXXXIX—11 
Destructive to-~ : Aus LI—18 
Pimples on one’s eyes indicate sight of— _ ... LII—2 
Attainment of— ae LIT-—-4 
Meeting of one’s— LXXXVII—-13; XCV-~-50 

To have many— bee CI—10 
Beneficial results in making -—- soi XCVIII-—10 
FRIENDSHIP.—among men will be on the increase, VIII—6; 

ACV 53 
Effect of-—between deadly enemies. bat XCVIIT~—12 
FRIGHT, See XCIlI—14 
FRIGHTENED. LXNVII1L—-116; LXXXVI-—-25 
FROG, XXIV--19; XXVII~6; XXVHI-—4, LIV--8, 30, 
39, 63, 67 

FRONT. oe Li-7 
FRONT GATES. oan XLVII—13 
FRONT VERANDAH. oe LIII—33 
FRONTAL BONE.—belongs to the masculine class of limbs. LI--8 
If the querist touches the - bes L1—-34 
Pimples on one’s— ee LII-—-2 
FROST. XIl~14; XLIT-- ; XLVI--92 
FRUITS. li—(18);  XLI--12 
—will be destroyed. V—-24; VILI-19; X--13 
People living on—will suffer. ae V--77 
Damage to ss IX-—-35 
Roots and—belong to Pulaha. a XIN—11 
—~are assigned to Mrigasiras, aes KV—3 

“3 ; Aslesha, ee XV—-7 

Trees with red—are assigned to Visakha. ... XV—-14 
Those that deal in-and feed on— sie XV——17 


Those that live on aquatic-— os XV~18 


INDEX 105 


The Moon presides over— es XVI-—-7 
The abundance of—of trees. woe =XAIX—1, 2 
Karkataka presides over— me XLI-—4 
Vrischika presides over— a's XLI—6 
Makara presides over-~ — XLI—7 
Deal in-— ..»XLIT—3, 9, 12 
—out of season. =F XLVI—26 
Over-luxuriant growth of—on a single tree, ... XLVI-—34 
Rain of— is XLVI-~—41 
Flowers and—in Chaitra and Vaisakha, sais XLVI--85 
If—and flowers are sighted. bag LI—36 
Trees near a house laden with— cause loss of children. LI[I—86 
Where the—of a tree are unnatural, eis LIV—56 
For increasing the yield of-— ode LV-—18 
Omens on trees with sweet— » LXRXXVI—17 
One will get— LXXXVII—7, 9, 15; XCV—23 
——-near a horse. Sue XCIIT—8 
Appearance of—and flowers out of season. ... XC VII—4 
FRYING PAN. .. LXVIII—-18 
FULL MOON. XXVI—I, 14, 15; XXVII—1, 2, 6 
FULL POT. Sight of a—at the beginning of a work. LXX[X-—7 
A-~-near a horse. ia XCIIT- 8 
Crow perched on a-—on the head of a damsel... XCV—44 
FUNERAL PYRE, .. LXXXVI-—-60 
G 
GAD. ae XCV-—-55 
GAIT—of a lion. eis LXII—1 
Horse having fine— ste LAVI—1 
—~of kings, of the rich and of the poor. we DLUXVIII--115 
-~like that of an elephant. 7 LXIX—14 
of a brisk— ae LXIX-—-20 


Sex of creatures to be determined from their-- LXXKXVI~6 
B. & ‘14. : 


106 INDEX 


, Elephant with a stumbling — XCIV~—12 
GAJA. One of the 9 roads ascribed to Venus. ... IXl, 4, 9 
XLVIi—4 
GALE. XXVII—5 
GAMBLERS.-—will come to grief, IX—-34 
Places occupied by— LI-5 
GAMBLING. LI—-20 
GAMBHEERAKA., XVI—16 
GANAKAS. XI -25 
GANAPATI. ALVI—12 
GANARAJYA. X1V—14 
GANDHAMAMSI. LI—15 
GANDHARA. The people of will be affected. 1V--23; V—77, 78 
—lies in the north of Bharatavarsha. X1V——-28 
~—belongs to Venus. XVI—26 
When Jupiter is vanquished by Venus, the-—will 
be destroyed. XVI[—18 
A man of the Hamsa class rules over the ~s. LXIX-~—26 
GANDHARVAS. Iarm to the— | XIL—8 
In the north are situated the-— XIV—31 
Sight of— XLVI—90 
Places kept apart for— XLVITI--25 
—are situated in the outer compartment. LIT[—44 
GANDH \RVANAGARA., lI—(18); XXXVE-1, 2, 3, 4, 5 
GANDHARNAV.A. LXXVII—14 
GANGES. V—655; XVI—-10, 16; XLIIL--32; DLXIX-—-26 
GANITA, I—-9 
GARA., bes C-l, 4 
GARDABHA., .. LXXXVITI—5 


GARDENS. A wagtail in one’s—tends to prosperity. 


XLV—=-4 


Royal ablution may be performed in the region of ~XLVIII~15 


One should have—laid out. LV—-1 
Arishta, Punnaga, ctc., should be planted in-- LV-—3 
Deities take a pleasure in residing in— LVI-~3 
Trees growing in-~ ; LIX—-2 
GARGA., I—5; IX—6; XI—1, 5; XIII-2; XXI-~2, 5; 


XXII—4; XXIV-—-2; XLVI-—1, 53, 57, 63, 80; XLVIII 


INDEX 


107 


2, 38, 51; L-15; LVI--31; LXV—8; LXXXVI—3,7 


GARLAND. Makers of—-s will come to grief X--9 
‘Standard bedecked with—s. XLITI--57 
King should be adorned with—s, XLIV-—27 
Worship with—s. XLVIII—27, 32 
Figure of a—on one’s sole. LXIEX--22; LXX-—10 
To have marks of a-- LXIX—24 
Umbrella to have—s of pearls LXXIII-—2 
One of cupid'’s snare are— LXXVI—2 
~~-do not shine in a min of grey hair. LXXVII~1 

GARMENTS. —are assigned to Mrigasiras. AV—3 
Thoughts about one’s— LI-—14 
One will obtain—when LI—19 


Retying one’s— 


LXXVUI—3 


Use of— XCVITI—10 
One to wear beautiful—s see Ci—8 
GARUDA. XI—62; LXXXVI-—-1 
One of the types of Temples. LVI—17, 24 
GARUDADHW AJA. LIV—87 
GATE. ALVI-70; XCI-—3 
GATE OF A TOWN. ANXIJI--22 
GATEWAYS. XXXVI—5 
GATHERING, XX—8 
GATI. VII—8 
GAUDAS. XIV—7 
GAUGE. AXITI—2 
GAVA. IX--2 
GAVYAS. XIV—-28 
GEETI., CIV-—49 
GEM. IT—(18); XU—-12; XVI-28; LXXX—2, 3 
—s are assigned to Mrigasiras, XV-~3 
“—S are assigned to Revati, XV—-25 
Kumbha presides overs XLI-—7 
Dealing in —s, - XLII~-6, 9, 12 
Vishnu should be adorned with Kaustubha— LVII~31 
Ona to enjoy wealth, women ands. LXVIII~12 


A cot decked with wonderful—s, a 


LXXIX—~14 


108 . INDEX 


A-—on the head of snakes. is LXXXII-—5 
‘One will get—s. ...LXXXVII—10, 16 
One will get a—called Susara. er LXXX-~—-23 
If a crow strikes the bed with a— sae XCV—12 
One will get oceanic—s. beg XCV—22 
Gifts of—s. or XCVII—17 
GEM-EXPERTS. aes XVI—18 
GEMS OF WOMEN. .. LXXVIT~13 
GEMINI. me CiI--2 
GENERAL. Mars presides overs, sae XVI—14 
Death of a— wes XXX—13 
Umbrella of a-— 08 LXXIII-—4 
GENERATING ORGAN. V—86; LXVHI—10 
GENEROSITY. mee XVI-—-29 


GENITAL ORGAN. LIII—54; LXVIII—8, 86; LXIX—16; 
LXX—3, 17, 24 


One belonging to the neuter class of limbs ... LI—9 
GENTLE. set LXITI—3 
GHANA. .. LXXVIT—10, 13 
GHATA. ..  LVI~—18, 26 
GHEE. LXXVI—3, 6, 8, 9 

—will become dear and rare. ..» V—60; VII-—4 

Mercury presides over— oan AVI—20 

Dealing in— ie XLIT-—5 

When there 6 a rain of— ae XLVI—43 

Serpents should be worshipped with ioe XLVITI-—31 

A sword having the smell of— duis L—21 

Drink prescribed for the sword is— ius L~-Z3 

When a woman has—in front of her adi LI—37 

A rock resembling-—in colour. sis L1V—-108 

If trees are smeared with— LV~—7; LIX—12 

One will eat edibles prepared in— wel, | CK CV 24 

Effects of flames appearing without the shower of —XCVII—10 
GHORA. sae VIlI—~8 
GHOSHA. i XIV—2, 30 
GHOSTS. XLVI-—78,; LXIX—37 


GIANTS.—are said to belong to Pulasthya, .., XUI—i1 


INDEX 109 


To Rahu belong— hs XVI~-37 
GINGELLY OIL. A sword rubbed wih 68 L-~-25 

Hair oil is to be made from— — LXXVII—6 
GINGER. LI~-15; LXXVI—11 
GIRDLE. The Sun God has a—round his waist. LVILI--47 

The hips of women support—s. oe LXX-——-4 
GIRIKARNIKA. sas XLIV—10 
GIRINAGARA, . F XIV—I1 
GIRIVRAJA. er X—14 
GIRLS. he XLVI—13 
GIRTA KUKKUTA. .. LXXXVIII—8 
GLANCES. LAXVII—3; XCII—9 
GLASS. Deal in— .»  XLII—8, 10 

One will obtain— we LXXXVII-—23 
GLOBES. vies LXVII~—6 
GLOSS. .. LXVIIT—101 
GLOSSINESS. LXIX—5; LXXII—2 
GLOSSY. When two planets at conjunction are XVII—~11 

Elephants who have tusks—and raised. _... LXVII—6 

Men with-—eyes. sei LXVIlI—67 

A maiden, the nails of whose feet are— _.... LXX~1 
GLOSSY TREES. as LIV—49 
GLOW WORMS. — XX VIII--23 
GLUE. ve LVII—3 
GLUTTONOUS. LXVIII~—20, 114; LXXVIII—17 
GLUTTONOUS PERSONS. ve XVI--15 
GO [X—1, 4; LXXXVIII—9 


GOAD. LXVIII—46; LXIX—24, LXX-—2, 10; LXXII—4 
GOATS, The price of—should be determined from 


plantains, ie XXIX—7 
—are destroyed, wee XX XIX—2 
A wag tail perched on the backs of — sae XLV—8 
Sacrifice of a-— .. XLVI—36, 59 
The whole of the Adhyaya. Soe LXV—- 


Elephants have tusks similar to the horns of a— LXVII-~-9 
Those that have a face similar to that of a—... LXVIII—104 
—-g and horses are pure at the face, ve LXXIV—8 


110 INDEX 


' -~is of no consequence in the winter season... LXXXVI-~—26 


—g bring good luck through their cries. we) LXXXVI—41 

At a query, the matter refers to a— .. LXXXVI—80 
GOAT’S HAIR. ‘és XLI 2 
GOAT’S HORN. L-~-25; LVII--7 
GOAT’S WOOL. stat XI_I- 6 
GO-BETWEENS. .. LXXVIIT—10 
GOBLINS. KXV—4, XXXIX—4 
Any unnatural behaviour in the idols of—__... XLVI—14 
Raising of— iN XCVITI--7 
GODAVARI. She XVI-—9 
GODS. XLIII—1; XLVIII—20, 25, 79; LIIIT—31; LXXXTIT—~1 
Abodes of —will suffer ruin. sie IX—42 
Marichi does harm to the sie XITI-—8 
Worshipping of— XLV--15; XLVI --17 
Portents in the idols of — ae XLVI ~—15 
Where there is no worship of— 2 XLVI--79 
~~—dwell near the lakes. ws LVI -4 
Nature of men resembles that of-—— ... LXVIII-108 
Devotion to— LXIX—-8, 29, 38; CI—16 
—dwell in the four corners of a cloth. oe LXXI—9 

Slit in the divisions of— .. LXXI--11, 12 
—created the Chamara deer. wes LXXII—1 
King will be honoured even by the— .. LXXIX—14 

_ reside in the root of the elephant’s tusk... XCIV—8 
GODDESSES. ee LXXIV—4 
GODOWNS. de X—7 
GOKSHURA. LIV~—100; LXXVI—10 
GOLANGULA. sai XVI—3 
GOLD. X—17; XXVI-—-7; XXVITI—3; LIV—110 
The Sun presides over—, ae XVI—4 
Abundance and cheapness of — we «Sr (as «XX XIX—~8 
Increase of— ee XXIX—10 
Mesha presides over— ee . XLI~2 
Makara presides over— __ he XLI~-7 
Deal in— oa XLIT—6 


When the fire shows the hue of—~ oa XLITI—33 


INDEX 


Wagtail perched near — 
Crowns made of pure— 


lf the—sheet for the crown expands easily ... 


Stones possessing the colour of— 
An idol made of—- 

Women are jike unto pure— 

A cot made of sandalwood and covered with 
At a query, the subject refers to-—when 
Gain of— 

Loss of— 

Ruin of-—smiths., 


114 


ALV,-—-6 
NLIX-~—-4 
XLIX—7 
LIV—110 

LX—4 
LXXIV--7 

~ DLXXIX— 14 
LXXXVI—80 


LXXXVII—2, 3 
. LXXXVII~30 
. LXXXVII-~32 


"If there be~ near a horse. XCIII~g 
Acquisition of— XCV—20 
Discolouration of — XCVII—13 
Gift of -and gems. - CV—7, 8 

GOLDEN AGE. VIII—34; IX—45 
GOLDEN BALANCE. XXVI—9 
GOLDEN ORNAMENT, LXXIV—1 
GOLDEN PIECE. LX—~-17 
GOLDEN TREE. LIV—70 
GOLD LADLE. XLIV—12 
GOLD REGIONS. XIV—31 
GOLD SCYTHIANS. XxIV—21 
GOLD SMITLHIS. V~53, 745 XCV~21 
GOMANTA. XVI—17 
GONARDA. iX~—13 
GONORRHGiA. LXVIU—?7 
GOOD. XV-—153 
GOOD-LOOKING FERSONS. V—76 
GOODNESS. LXIX-—8 
GOOD PEOPLE. V—40 
GOPA. LXXXVI—30 
GOPEETAH. XLV=3 
GOSWAMI. LXXXVI—32 
GOURAGREEVA. XIV—3 
GOVEETHEE. IX—2 
GOVINDA. 


CV--l4 


112 | INDEX 


GRACEFUL GAIT. .» LXXVITI—13 
GRAFTING. is LV—6, 8 
GRAHA CHULLI. sa LILI—40 
GRAINS. . XV—5; XXIV—36; XLII—11 
One ought not to sleep above— sa LIUI—124 
GRAMMAR. .. LXVHI-1U1 
GRAMMARIANS. .. XVI~-18, 24 
GRANARIES. XV—8, XVII—14; LIII- 16; XCVII—6 
GRAPE. = LV~—4, 10 
GRASANA. ‘3: V—43, 46° 
GRASS. XXVIII—13; XCIII—5; XCV--5, 12, 18 
GRASTASTA. abs V—-27 
GRASTODAYA. — V—27 
GRATEFUL .» LXIX—14, 35 
GREAT BEAR, sil XI --34 
GREAT VEIN, a8 LIV—4 
GREEDY. a CI—12 
GREEN, o. LXVITI--67 
GREEN FROG, se LIV—30 
GREEN GRAM.—will be destroyed, Se V--75 
Good yield of — oa VIUI—13 
Visakha presides over— ve XV—14 
—will thrive. XXV--2 
Abundance or otherwise of——is to be judged on 
Chirabilwa. ae XXIX—5§ 
Kanya presides over— re XLI—5 
A stone resembling~~in colour. ie LIV—107 
GREEN GRASS. Wag tail perched on— __... XLV—7 
—a place favourable for a query. “es LI—2 


A dog passing urine on a ground covered with— 


A crow cawing from— oo. °* KCV—34 
GREEN PINEONS. oi XLVIII-~6 
GREESHMA RITU. es IlI-—~23 
GREESHMA SEASON. ats XXVIL—7 
GREY CLAY. abs — Liv—-13 


GREY EYES. ee LXX—19 


INDEX 115 


GREY HAIRS. » LXXVITI—17 
GRIEF. People will be oppressed with fear and—if [X*-37 

Pimples on one’s sides produce— ee LiI—4 

Pimples on one’s belly lead to— ‘a LII—6 

The house Vata leads one to—from quarrel ... LITI—-41 

A house owner by hurting Brahman will come to LILIl—66 

Poverty and—are produced by feet. seit LXVIII—3 

An omen in the 30th division produces .. LXXXVIT—41 
GRIHAGODHIKA. .» LXXXVIII—8 
GROINS. a LXI—16 
GROOMS. Ses X—3 
GROUND. LIIl—88, 90; LIV—60 
GROUND FLOOR. soy LIIIl— 27 
GRUEL. - LIV—114; LXXVI—1l11 
GUARDIAN DEITY. ane XLVIII-—73 
GUCHCHA. <5 LXXXI—33 
GUDA. XIV—3; XCV—54 
GUDUCHI. se LIV—115 
GUGGU. .. LXXXVITI—15 
GUGGULU. LVII-—3, 55 LXXVII~9, 11 
GUHARAJA. — LVI—18, 25 
GUHU. ies XCV—56 
GUILDS. or X—13 
GULUHAS. oe XIV—23 
GUM. .. LXXXVIII~17 
GUNDRA GRASS. sind LIV—100 
GUNJA. se LXXXI—8 
GURULU KISI KISI. .. LXXXVITI—36 

H 

HATHAYAS., see XIV—-20 
HAIL~STONES. IX—42; XXI-—-33, 35; LXXXI-~-24 
HAIR. The earth will be strewn with— Seg IX—25 


B. 8, 15. 


444 INDEX 


The yalue of cows and horses is determined 


by their— - XXVI-8 
If a wagtail is perched on a heap of-— tke XLV—9 
Flames proceeding from—s. 5 XLVI—22 
Where the ground is free from— 63 XLVIIl—16 
—belongs to the masculine class of limbs... -LI-8 
When a querist is standing on— sds LI—14 
If the, person touches the— vee LI—34 
The line of — ws LVILI--13, 15 
Bulls having slender — be LXI—11 
A goat with blue—on the head. sii LXV ~—8 
A horse having fine-- ath LXVI—1 
An elephant with fine— fea LXVII—6 
A man with thin— ss LXVIIU-— 4 
Kings have a single-—in a pore. .» LXVIII—5, 81 
One’s temples covered with slender— ae LXIX-- 13 
Qne’s—, dark and single in each pore. baa LXIX—16 
A, man of Ruchaka type has beautiful— __.... LXIX—27 
One with rough and hard— or LXI>*.--38 
The middle of a woman with three folds and without -LXX~5 
A woman with glossy— _ LXX—9 

A woman whose upper lip is covered with too 
much— wv. DLXxX—20, 23 
-—of the Chamara deer. .» DLXXIT—1, 2 
A man of grey— re LXXVII—1 
To turn one’s—which is white into black. ... LXXVII—3 
Diamonds showing scratches like— a LXXX~—15 
Omens stationed on— .. LXXXVI—60 
If a crow throws——on a couch, es XCV-—12 
If a crow caws holding a—in its mouth... XCV-—40 
HAIR OIL. sa LXXVII—6 
HAIR'S TIP. a LVIII—2 
HAIRY. LXVITI—59; LXX—17, 21 
HAIRY CIRCLES. LIL~10; LXX—17 
Bulls with— = LXI—13 
Horses with—under the eyes, jaws etc.,_.., LXVI—2 


People with—going from left to right. sens LXVI]I--26 


INDEX 115 


HAKKA, 3. LXERVIT—4 
HALAS, XIV—22; XVI--6; XXXTI--19 
HALADAS, aay XIV—22 
HALF-CASTES. sist XVI—11 
HALF-MOON LXVIII—~—70; LXX-—-8 
HALL, igs LIWi—17 


HALOS, XXI-19; XXII—7; XXVIII—6; XXX—2, 8, 31, 33; 
XXXIV— whole chapter. XLII--1; XLVI—4, 84, 88; 


XCVII—3 

HAMLET. .. LXXXVI—78 

HAMMERING, ne LIV—112 

HAMSA. One of the types of temples ‘id LVI—18 

One of the varieties of bulls. — LXI—17 

One of the Mahapurusha yogas. LXIX—2, 7, 24, 26, 35 

HAND One of the masculine class of limbs, ... LI--8 

If the querist scratches his feet with his— ... LI—13 

Pimples appearing on one’s—s. an LI{—6 

Baladeva has a plough in his — me LVIII—36 
Goddess’ Ekanasa with one—on her hip and a lotus 

in the other. see LVIII—37 

One to have—s red. ws = LXVITI-~--87 
The—s of one belonging to the Bhadra class of men 

have the lustre of lotus. a LXIX—15 

—g marked with figures of ploughs, etc, ... LXIX—17, 34 

—g that have wrist-joints hidden. ai LXX—11 

—g that make women unhappy and poor. ... LXX—-22 

A dog approaching a traveller with a human ~LXXXIX—l({c) 

HANDMAIDS. .. LXXVIT—9 

HANDLE. LXXII—4; LXXItI—2 

HANDSOME.—persons will suffer, ae VIH—8 

Punarvasu presides over-—men. ag XV-—5 

Aswini presides over-—men. tue XV—26 


The God of the Jains should be represented— LVILi—45 
A man of the Malavya type has a-—body ... LXIX—10 
A person belonging to the Bhadra class is— LXIX—15 
A woman having a—nose. me LXX—7 
HANGING, sk xC~—-: 


pial INDEX 


HANGING EARS. sis LXII—1, 2 
HAND, - ..  LXVITI-—88 
HAPPINESS. IV—11, 16, 30; VIII-—7, 12, 15; XI—8, 49; 
XVI--29; XVIII--3; XXIX—11; XXXVII~—1; XLVII— 

4, 12, 17; XLVIII—82, 86; ALIX-—4, 6; L—19; 


LXVIII—34 

Pimples on the back of one’s face lead to— LII—2 
, Pimples on one’s testicles lead to one’s—— ... LII-—6 
Broad and lofty brows indicate great-—- _... LXVIII—68 
One with a sunken stomach is without— ... LXVITI~19 
One devoid of— six LXVITI—26 
One with fleshy and pendant ears lead to—... LXVIII— 59 
An enjoyer of— LXVITI—81, 104; LXXXVII—6 
Things bestowing wealth and—on a woman, LXX-—5, 6, 11 
A white umbrella brings— ee LXX'II-—3 
The pith and essence of aK LXXIV—1 
A cot made of Sal tree gives— at LXXIX-~-13 
Increase of wealth and-— sas LXXIX—2]1 

When a dog comes towards a traveller with a wet 
bone, he brings— .. LXXXIX—1(c) 
A dog sporting with cows indicates— we LXXXIX—10 
Tf a bull cries at night it indicates— Sua XCII--2 

Two crows standing on a. donkey or a camel 
indicate — eae XCV—47 
_- Venus, Jupiter or Mercury in the 4th house at a 

girl's marriage bestows— ae CIII-—4 
HAPPY.: People will be— be V--70 
A man having a penis with a thick knot becomes—LXVIII--7 
A man urinating noisily is— bee LXVIII—10 
A man with fleshy buttocks is— nek LXVIII~17 
‘A man with straight folds is— aie LXVIII—25 
A man with stout, muscular and sunken nipples is—-LX VIII—27 
- A man weighing half a Bhara will be— ... LX VIII—106 
Birth of children who will be longlived and—- LXXVIII—23 
. One born in Bharani will be— oy CI-—1 
“One born in Punarvasu will be-— ae CI—4 


One born in Uttarabhadra will be— < CI-—-14 


INDEX «197 


HARA HOURA. sag XIV—33 
HARA. 7 LXXXI--32 
HARA PHALAKA. — LXXXI-~34 
HARD STONE. ea LIV—42 
HARDY. so LXIX—27 
HARE. Flesh of— ‘se LI—34 
-~is strong in the west. we LXXXVI—22 
—is of no consequence in the winter season... LXXXVI—26 
Mention of—is favourable. .. LXXXVI—42 
A-—running on the left side. . LXXXVITI—21 
HARE-EATER. .. LXXXVI—22 
HAREETA. LXXXVI—21; LXXXVIIT—15 
HAREETAKEE. XLVIH-—39; LXXVI—3, 11; LXXVII—10 
HAREM. ns II—(18) 
People in the—will perish when sae V—30 
Ruin of the king’s— XLVI—13; XCIII—2 
Enjoy in the-—- bag LXXVII—4 
HARI, ac CV—8 
HARIDRA obi LXXIX—2 
HARIDRA TREE. ole LIV—45 
HARIDRAKA. ats LXXIX—16 
HARLOTS. X—9; LXXXVII~—16, 39 
HARMFUL. LXXI—11; XC-—5; XCV—56; XCVI—6 
HARSH WORDS. Bae LXXV-~—7 
HARVEST. AXVI—13; XL--14 
HASTA. = CiI-—3 
Mercury's transit over— see VII-—4 
—-, one of the stars constituting the Ajaveethee. IX—3 
When Venus is in-- see IX-—30 
When Saturn is in— at X—1, 9 
When a bad comet transits— oo XT-—56 
When the Sun is in— aa XII—22 
To—are assigned robbers, elephants, etc., ... XV-—11 
Rainfall in— ve XXIJI—6 
~—belongs to the wind circle. sae XXXII—8 
When-is struck by a meteor. = = XXXITI-~19 


~—is propitious for sinking wells. ie LIV—-123 


118 INDEX 


—is good for the planting of trees, | LV—3} 

» Wearing a new cloth in— LXXi—4 

Bitth in— ci-y 

HASTIKARNA, LIV—101 

HASTIKARNA ‘TREE. XXIX—7 

HASTINAPURA. XIV--4 

HATCHET. LVIII-—-58 

HATERS OF OTHER'S WIVES. LXVIlI—25 

HATRED, People will be free from fear and VILI—30; 

XLVII—5 

Strife and intense--among people if X---20 

There will be--among friends, XLVII-—-13 

The house Kacha leads to—among kinsmen. LITI~-41 

HAUGHTY. CI-—~3 

HAUNCHES. LXVI-~—3 

HAWKS. Figures resembling— LXXIX—24 

—are beneficial to the right of a traveller LXXXVI—38 

HEAD. V—6;, LIIT--51; LVIII—14 

—-belongs to the neuter class of limbs. LI—10 

When the querist strikes the — LI—11 

If a person touches the— LI—34 

Pimples on the— LII-—2, 4, 10 

When the House God is bereft of the — LITI—67 
The House God has his—turned towards the 

north-east. LITI—51 

A cock with a big— LXIII—2 

A tortoise with a serpentine— LXIV—2 

A goat having a white— LXV—5 

A goat with a spotted— LXV—6 

A goat with blue hair on the— LXV—8 

Hair on the—of a man. LXVITI—5 

A man of the Hamsa class has a round— LXIX—24 

One with an even— LXX-—-9 

The—represents the 10th stage of life. LXX—26 

Theé-—will become black when LXXVII—~—3 

If an omen passes by a person’s— LXXXVI—67 


A dog approaching a traveller with a human—-LXXXIX—l(c) 


INDEX 19 


Flame appearing in a horse’s— . MAMCITI——2, 4 

Blue flies clinging to one’s— suit XCV-«58 
HEAD-DRESS. ia XLIV—~—27 
HEADLESS. ae IIi—17 
HEALTH. Jupiter in his northern course confers—, 

happiness and plenty. aes VITI—15 


One should guess the--of mankind from Peelue XXIX-~—11 
A sword with the lustre of beryl, gold or lightning 


confers—and prosperity. su L--22 
An idol of gold bestows a LX—4 
One should expect sound— when we )—CO LXXIX-~21 


- Good—and long life may be expected from ... LXXXV—5 
A dog sporting with cows indicate sound—and 

joy. we LXXXIX—10 

A crow passing near the ear of a traveller confers— XCV—25 
Mercury in the 9th in the marriage-chart gives 


good— as CIII—9, 13 
HEALTHY. wat XII—21 
HEART. Aslesha constitutes the-of the Samvatsara 

purusha. ie VILI—19 
~—is one of the neuter limbs. ~ LI—9 
Pimples on one’s—and breasts. ate LII—4 
Brahman is situated in the —of the House. God, LIITI—54 
Hairy circles on ithe—of a horse. a: LXVI-—2 
“A horse is perfect when it has a broad rump and—- LXVI—1 
A-—that is raised, large, muscular, etc., .. LUXVHI—28 
The—represents the 6th stage of life. si LXX—25 
The soul is immerged in the region of the— ... LXXV-—-4 
HEAVENLY OMENS. .. DUXXXVI—6 
HEELS. One of the feminine class of limbs, ... LI—9 
Pimples on the— es LII—8 
Kings have fine--- sek LXVIII-~2 
HEIGHT. . LITI—24, 25 
—-of men, LXVIII~-105; LXIX--13, 18, 21, 25, 29 
HELIACAL RISING AND SETTING. .. XXVITI—20 
HELMSMEN. ‘de XV—25 


HELPING. a LXKV—9 


120 INDEX 


HEMAGIRI. “a XIV—~19 
HEMAKUDYAS. sei XIV--9 
HEMALAMBA. sais VIlI—39 
HEMATALAS. see XIV-——28 
HEMANTA. .. LXXXVI—28 
HEMANTA RITU. sa IlI-—-24, 26 
HEMP. me XX1IX--6 
HEN. re LXIII-—3 
HENPECKED. sah CI—13 
HERBALISTIC TREATMENT. 2 II—(18) 
HERBS. People who are clever in the use of-— V—41 
—will be destroyed. re X—-13 
The Moon presides over— re XVI~7 
The earth will abound in— sie XIX— 12 
Decay of— a XXXITI—10 
Mars presides over— — XLI—2 

— prescribed for the ablution. .. SLVIN—37 

In Sakuni,—become fruitful. sae C—5 
HERDS. as XLVI-—-55 
HERDSMEN. eee XVI-—4 
HERETICS.—will be destroyed. es V—29 
—will suffer. sae VITI—12 
When Venus is in Dhanishta, there will be danger to—IX—33 

To Uttarabhadra are assigned— ae XV—24 
Fire seen in the northeast forebodes evil to-— XXXI—4 
The country whose ruler is a friend of— __... XLVI—76 
HERETICAL. 2 te XV—10 
HERMAPHRODITE. sie LXXVI--l 
HERMITS. .. SMLVII—61 
—will suffer, se V—28 
Marichi proves destructive to the—living in the forest. XIII—9 

_ ~~are assigned to Uttarabhadra. es XV—24 
Groups of—and cattle vanquish. aes XIX-~—2 
Places occupied by— 4 LI-—5 
HERMITAGE, XLIV—8; XLVIII-—-—13 
Atri’s— oe XIV—14 


Trees in—s should be avoided for images. ... LIX-—-2 


index 121 
HERO. When Saturn is in Jyeshta,——es come to grief, X—-13 


—es are assigned to Magha. er XVe~-8 
Great martial—~es are assigned to Jyeshta ... XV—16 
The Sun presides over—es. sae XVI—4 
Those who have a muscular chest become—es. LXVIII—29 
HEROIC. LXIX—8, 20, 27, 35 
HERON. Dents resembling a— sa L—3 
Hands marked with figures of-— ae LXX-—22 
A slit in the form of a— mee LXXI— 12 
—gs entering an army. eae XCV—46 
HERPES. .» MXXXII-~-14 
HICCOUGHS. sts LI—32 
HIDES. ALV—8 LXXXVII—8 
HIGH-BORN. say XV-—5 
HILLS. »» XXVITI—14 
HILL MEN. aoe XVI—-17 
HILT. see L-—-9 
HIMALAYA. XIV—24, XVI—-17; XLIII-—35; XLIV—24; 
LXXII—1 
Diamonds got from the—are slightly reddish, LXXX—7 
—, one of the sources of the best pearls. ow» LXXXI~2, 5 
HIMSRA. we LXXXVI—-31 
HIND LEGS. is XCIII—-3 
HINDRANCE. me XCV—28 
HIPS, LVIII—37; LXVI~-2; LXX—4 
Limb of the feminine class. Ss LI--—8 
—represent the 4th stage of one’s life. oe LXX—24 
HIRANYANABHA. sat, LIII—37 
HIT. XV—31; LII—4, 9; LXXXVI—67 
HOARDING. ea CI—5 
HOAR FROST. sie XI-—-14 
HOG, LI-—-34; LV--20 
Pearls are got from—s. ae LXXXI—1 
If two crows are seen standing on a ae XCV— 47 
HOG’'S RICE. sie XXIX-~-2 
HOLES. © XLIX—7; LIII—90; LX—6 
HOLLOWS. XALITI—14; XCV~—17 


BB. 16, 


‘2 “etx 


‘HOLY GRASS 7d LIV—-39 
HOLY HOUSE. os XLIV —6 
(HOLY PLACES. .. XLVEL~67 
‘HOLY TREE. as I, III--90 
‘HIOMA. XXIV—8; XLVI—6 
HONEST FOLK. — XV—6, 15 
HONEY. LXXVI—3, 6; LXXVII[-—11, 27, 32 
—will become dear and rare. at V—60 
-ris assigned to Purvaphalguni. ; XV--9 
When the Moon has the red hue of-— ae XXVITI—11 
Déaling in— XLII-—5 
Invoking the banner with fruits and— ae XLII--+60 
Edibles consisting of — a XLIV~—11 
tf—flows from trees she XLVI—27 
When there is a rain of— at XLVI-~-43 
The triple sweet—sugar, ghee and — .. SLVIIT-31 
A place where—1s sold. LI--5 
When—is in front of a woman, ee LI - 37 
A rock résembling--in colour, Ss LIV --108 
If trees are smedred with LV—-7; LIX~-12 
Semen Having the smell of— ase LXVIIL -15 
HONEY COMB. ve XCV--58 
HONOUR. LXXXV—4; XCV ~H#4 
TIOODS. 1 LXXXI--25 
HOOFS LXI—3, 9, 11, 14; LXVI~1 
FIOOFED ANIMALS. wd LXXIX—31 
HORA. .. I-9; II—14 
HORIZON. = XXXI—5 
HORNS.— of the Moon. IV—8, 9, 10, 11, 14, 15, 16, 17; 
XLVII—~—16 
Q@oat's— a L--25 
Cows ‘having shaking— soe LXI--2 
Ballhaving gem-like— be LXI—7 
Bults with red and slender-— .. LXI—11, 18 
“A “white bull copper-coloured in— on LXI-—17 
‘Goats that have no— LXV—-4, 11 


‘ Bivphants havingtusks similar to the--of a pose LXVII~9 


ad e a 


IND 103 


HORNED ANIMALS. : "oo 6RVIN-8 
HORRIPULATION, “A xe™11 
HORSES, II—(18); V——44, 66, 72) Vide~6;: [X—-43; X-—3; 
! | XI—4; XV—13, 19, 26- 


i}: Fhe Moon presides over— XVI-—8 
“ To Jupiter belong— : nae XVI-—-23 
To Venus belong— , XVI--27 
When the Moon is to the north of Venus,—will' 
flourish. Si XVIH—5 
Monarchs: with—go about destroying the lands by war. XIX-—3 
The value of-—is determined by their hair... XXVI—8 
‘The price of—should be determined from the 
Aswakarna. oe XXEX-—-7 
Clouds having the shape of — a3 KXXX—-27 
The fire seen in the north-west bodes evil to— XXXI—4 
The Asani falls on— aa XXXITI—4 
Ulkas resembling— .. MXXTEEI—I10 
Destruction of —in battle. - XXXWI—S5 
In the 3rd watch of the night —and elephants will 
be destroyed. sas XXXEX——5. 
Dhanus presides over — oe AXLE 6. 
Dealing in— sof XLH-~7 
If: the sacrificial fire resembles--- — XLIEF--35 
Lustration for-— es XLIV—1 
A string should be tied to the necks of—- XLIV—5 
EXxpiatory ceremony for the — ar XLIV—6 
The--that are worshipped. ea XLIV—7 
A--after being consecrated, bathed etc., _... XLIV——¥5§ 
Activities of-— sas XLIV—t8 
The priest should give the—a rice ball etc., XLIV-—-t9, 20, 22 
Avmy consisting of-—, elephants. Sng XLIV—28 
A wagtail on the heads of-— oe XL V-—-4 
When. a carriage moves without — a XLVI—66 
The king who bathes his— .. XLVIIE-87. 
A bull with speed similar to that of a— an _UXI—15 


A. white cock crowing at dawn bestows prosperity on—LXIlI— 
A:~is perfect when - LXVI-1 


124: INDEX 


—g that have long hairy circles. ca LXVI—2 
omg that have hairy circles on their upper lips . . . LX VI-~45 
Persons with palms containing figures of— ... LXVI—45 
Persons with genital organs hidden like that of a— LXIX—16 
Damsels having the marks on their soles or palms of -~LXX—10 


Goats and—are clean at the face. mee LXXIV—8 

The word ‘jewel’ is applied to— bs LXXX—2 

The-~is strong in the north. + LXXXVI—-23 

The—is of no consequence in the winter season. LXXXVI—26 

The-——is very good in the east. ws LXXXVI-—-45 

One will get a—if LXXXVII~8, 13, 20 

Death of one’s— wo» LXXXVII—38 

Destruction of— oo» LXXXVII—43 

If a dog passes urine on a— ... LXXXIX—1(a) 

A jackal makes—pass dung and urine. ag XC—11 

When a jackal cries and is reechoed by— ... XC—12 

Chapter dn— .. XCIII—whole 

One will get—if we &CY—22, 23 

A crow cawing, sitting on the back of a— ... XCV—48 

HORSE DEALERS. oR XV—26 

HORSE GRAM. The state of—is known from the 

Jujube fruits, wk XXIX-—5 

Kanya presides over— swe XLI~—5 
——with Jujube fruits, gruel, etc., should be poured 

on a rock, ee LIV—114 

One will obtain— .. LXXXVII~—22 

One will eat food prepared from— hat XCV—21 

HORSE GROOMS. sis XV—26 

HORSE KEEPERS. ee IX-—35 

HORSE RIDERS. a4 XV—26 

HOSTILE INVASION. sa XL—7 

HOSTILITIES, sie xXxx—9 

HOT-TEMPERED. A ruler who is— sé XLVI—76 

.. Aman of a demoniac nature is— we «=LXVITI-113 

One in whom the qualily of darkness predominates is—LXIX—9 

HOT WATER. ag XLVI—43 


HOUSES. Atmospheric Ketus are such as are seen ins, XI—4 


INDEX 225 


When dogs stand on roofs of-~and bark. _... XXVIII—10 
A rough wind blows crushing—~ sss XXX—6 
Meteors falling on-— bax XXXITI—20 
If-—-ase burnt without fire. aa XLVI—20 
The ablution may be done in a prosperous— XLVIII—14 
—of a commander-in-chief. ... LITI—S5 
—of ministers. ‘ag LIII—6 
—of the yuvaraja. Aa LUI—7 
—of feudatory chiefs. ae LIII—8 
—of Directors, officers. oe LIWN—9 
Length of— sie LHI~—11 
’ --<of Brahmins, Kshatriyas. .  LITI-—-12, 13 
—of the mixed classes. ee LIU-15 
——of ascetics, etc., ste LIII---16 
—of Brahmins. ..  LIIT~—18, 19 
—of kings, commanders. ane LIII-—24 
The Sarvatobhadra — oe LITI—31! 
The Nandyavarta— ak LIII—-32 
The Siddharta— se LIII—39 
The Yama Surya— oe LIlI—39 
The Danda— .»  LIJI-—39, 41 
The Vata-— ..  LITI~39, 41 
The Graha Chulli— ...  LIII—40, 41 
Thu Kacha— .»  LIJIT-—40, 41 
Thorny trees near— a LITI-—-86 
If a minister s—is near by oe LITI—89 
If a rogue’s—is near by sii LITI—89 
If a—is elevated in the east or north. sie LITI—115 
If the—has an elevation towards the east. ... LII—117 
Time when to enter a— io LITI—125 
Soil for the construction of — LVI—9 
The cycle of quarters is applicable to the 
construction of — + EXXXVIT—18 
If crows build their nests on— sae XCV—5 
If a crow facing the Sun caws from a-—looking 
at the east,’.’. sai XCV—19 


A crow cawlng from a— bc; te XCV—34 


.* Beesbuilding, their haney-comb. inside a-— ... XCV—-58 
Sudden appearance of ant hillsin a-~ a XC VIT—9 
Effeot oft—being filled with dust. . 868 XCVI—-13 
Construction of or entry intoa— . sie XCVIILT—17 
Affairs connected with— sis C—3, 4 

HOUSE-BUILDING, is LITI—1 
HOUSE CORNER, ses XLV—9 
HOUSE-GOD. LIII—-3, 51, 59, 67 
HOUSE-HOLDER. ee LIlI-—-40 
HOUSE SMOKE. ad LVII—5 
HOWL. XC—9, 10, 11, 15 
HOWLING. .. XLVI—67, 58 
HRISHEEKESA. oe CV—-15 
HUB. LXXXVII—18, 19 
HUE, wie LXIN-—24 
HUHOO. 26 XC—13 
HUM HUM GUGLUK. .» LAXXVIII-36 
HUMAN BEINGS. XXXVI—5; XLVI—7; LXVIH—1 
HUMAN. NATURE, w= LXVII~112 
HUMBLE. oe LXVILI—67 
HUMP. .. LXI—4, 11, 18 
HUNCH-BACKED. LXIX—32; XCVI—12 


HUNGER, IV—19; 29; V—23, 88, 95; VII—3, 7, 18; IX 
—18; XIX—~19; XXVII—-4, CI—9 


HUNGRY, .» LXVUI—114 
HUNS. XI—61; XIV—27; XVI-—38 
HUNTERS. Destruction to the— .. V-—35, 39, 76 

—are not desirable in the East. wv. LXXXVI—-46 

One will meet— .. LXXXVIE—10 
HURT. A lunar mansion is said to be—when ... XV—31 

If vulnerable points be—by impure materials. | LIII-~58, 59 
HUSBAND. LXX—20; CHI-—2, 3, 6 
HUSBANDMEN. XV—28; LKXXVII—23 
HUSBANDRY. a ALX— 10 
HUSK. XLVILI—16; LI—4, 14, 29 
HUSK GRAIN, XV—4, 7, 11, 27; XLI-~4 


The Sun presides over— ee -, RVI-—~4 


IRDRX toh 


HYMNS. - | XLIV—7; XLVITI-~=31, 77 
HYPOCRITES. . .. RVI—14, 37 
I 
ICHNEUMON. ...LXXXVI—21, 37 


ICHOR. XXIV—17; XLITI—36; XLIV—23; L-—2!; LXVII 
—5, 7; LXIX—16 

IDAVATSARA. re VIII-—-24 

IDVATSARA. ae VITI—-24 

IDOLS.  IJ-—(18); XLVI—8, 13, 15; LVITI—3, 4, 5; LX-— 
4, 5, 16; LXXV-—6 


IGNORANCE. - LXIX—9 
IGUANA. we LXXXVHI-3 
IKSHVAKU. V--75; IX—17; XI—58 
ILLUCK. " VIII—7 
ILLNESS. LXXVIIT—I1; LXXXIX—8 
ILL-PLACED. . CIV—57, 59 
ILL-REPUTE. = LII—89 
ILL-TREATMENT. ..  LXXIV—10 


IMAGES, II—2, (18); XLVI—10; LVI—14, 16; LWVIIEI—29 
LIX—1, 5, 6, 7; IuN—6, 7, 10; XCVIT—-6 


IMAGES OF GODS, or XXXII—-20 
IMBECILE. - XCVI—12 
IMMORAL, sis CITI--12 
IMMORTALS. re XLITI--3 
IMMOVEABLES. XV—19; XXXH—4 
IMPLEMENTS. ne XCV—22 
IMPOSTERS. si XVI—19 
IMPOTENT. sat LXVITI--41 
IMPOVERISHED ae LXVIIT—41 
IMPRECATIONS. or XCVII—9 
IMPREGNATION. + LXXVIH—26 


IMPRISONMENT. - When the wagtail is-seen perched 
on.a piece-of hide, there -will be—- . XLV-~--8; LI—-14 


128 


Pimples on one’s fingers lead to— _ se LII—8 
-If one’s forehead be low, there will be .... LXVIII—72 
Omens bringing about one’s— LXXXVI—60; LXXXVI—67; 


LXXXIX—1 (d) 


If jackals sound like Phi Phe, there will be— XC—13 


The flaming of a horse’s hind-legs leads to the 


owner s—— 


ACITI—3 


If horses neigh facing the burning quarter, the 


owner will suffer— 


XCIII—~10 


A crow cawing from a house causes one’s—when XCV--19 


A crow sitting on a tree entwined with creepers 


causes— XCV—37 
A crow cawing holding a chain, strap or creeper | 
causes ate XCV—42 
If two crows are seen Standing on a hog, there 
will be— XCV—47 
A crow producing the sound Kagaku causes-~ XCV—53 
Certain asterisms prove suceessful in causing 
the—of others. XCVIII—-7 
Certain planets in the 7th house at the time of 
matriage cause— was CIiil-—-7 
IMPUDENT. LXXIV—-15; CI~—7 
IMPURE FELLOWS. XVI-—33 
INAUSPICIOUS, LXVIII—83; LXXX-—15 
INCENSE. ALVIII—32 
INCREASE.—of cows. ; XCII-—3 
—of enemies. sae xCV—9 
INCOME. LXXVIT— 
INCANTATIONS. XCVITI—7 


INDIAN FIG, 
INDIAN FIG TREE. 


LX-—-8; LIII—-85 


INDICATIONS. LIII—103, 104, 105, 106, 107, 108, 109; 


INDIGENCE. 


LXXVIII-—3, 7, 8, 15 
LXVIII—69; CIII—10 


INDRA, XXXII~-6; XXXIII—20; XXXIV—-2; XLIII—6, 7, 
8, 12, 13, 14, 24, 30, 52, 54, 55, 67; XLIV—26; XLVII 
—2, 70, 77, 86; LITI-43, 47; LIV—-3; LVITI-~-42; 

LX—11; LXVIII--94; ULXXXI-—-26 


——is the lord of one of the Yugas. 


comprising one of the Jovial circle. 


In the lustrum presided over by— 
Rain-God— 

—will be pouring rain. 

Men devoted to— 

Hlymns addressed to— 

—should be worshipped. 

Beauty of— 

Beauty born of— 

Figure of— 

- Diamond presided over by — 
Pearl presided over by—— 
Teachings of— 

The quarter presided by— 


The asterism Jyeshta is presided over by— ... 


The lunar day presided over by— 
The Karana presided over by— 


INDRA’S BANNER. XXXIII-—-24; LII— 


129 


VIII—-23 
VIIIs—26 
VIII--33 
XII—13 
LXXXII—6 
XV—14 
XLIV--6 
XLVI~—81 
XLVIII-—-9 
LXV IL-—94 
LXIX—29 
LXXX—8 
LAXXI—7 
LXXXVI—1 


LXXXVI--75 


XCVII—5 
XCIX—1 
C--1 


112; XLIII—37; 


ALIV—14; XLVIII-—~78; LIX—14; LX~—12; XCVII—8 


INDRA’S BOW. 
INDRA’S CIRCLE. 
INDRA’S DAUGHTERS. 


V—95 


XXXII—18, 27, 30, 31 
XLITI—39, 58, 65 


INDRA’S MOTHER. XLITI—40 
INDRA’S PERIOD. XXXII—26 
INDRA’S STANDARD, XLVI—74 
INDRA'S TREE. LIV—69 
INDRADHWAJA. II—(18) 
INDRAGNI, VITI—23, 45; XCVITI~-4 
INDUCH CHANDRA, LXXXI—31 
INDUS. V—66, 80; XIV—19; XVI—16, 21 
INDUSTRIAL WORKSHOPS LITI—9 
INDUSTRIOUS. CI—3, 6, 7 
INFANTS. XVI—19 
INFANTICIDES. XVI—14 
INFIRM PEOPLE. V—38, 41 
INFLAMMATION. LII~9 


B.S. 17, 


130 INDEX 


INGRESS. . LXXXVI—55 
INGUDI TREE. he XXIX-—6 
INJURY, Gs L—9, 10 
INJURIES TO SHOES. ‘as II—(18) 
INK. a LXXI~10 
INSECTS. IlI~29; XXV—3, LIV-—93 
INSINCERE. ot CI-5 
INSTRUMENTAL MUSIC. LXXXVI—22, 39 
INST: LLATION. .. LX~1, 15, 21 
INSTALLER. = LX—18 
INTEGER. a LVII—2 
INTELLIGENT. XV—5; LXVIII—22, 36; LXIX—15, 38; CI—1 
INTERCALARY., sch XXVI~—11 
INTER-LOCKED TREES. ee LV—13 
INTERMEDIATE DIRECTIONS. a XI—28 
INTOXICATED, we LXXXVI-25 
INUNDATIONS. ah XLVI—89 
INVASIONS. XXXIJI—12; XLVI~—57, 62 
INVOCATIONS, ..  XLVITI—32 
IRAVATA. IX~—1, 2, 49; XXX—8; XLVII—4 
IRAVATEE. - X VI--27 
IRON. XXVIII—5; XLI—6; LI—17; LIV—8, 39; LVIT—8 
LXXXVII~3 
IRON DUST. LXXVI—3; LNXVII-—2 
IRON WEAPON. “3 L-—-26 
IRRITABLE. ms CI -10 
ISI, we LXXXVIIT--39 
ISLAND OF THE GREAT OCEAN. ne XVI--7 
ISSUE, sis LXVIUI—7 
ISSUELESS. LXVIH—12; CIl--5 
IVORY, XXVI—8; LXXIX:-19 
IVORY ARTICLES. .. LXXXVII—9 


IVORY PEG. ie LITI~60 


INDEX 131 


JABALI. .. MXLVITI-~65 
JACK TREE. LITI—87; LV—4, 11 
JACKAL. XXVITI-24; XXX-—30; XLVI—63, 68; LXVIII 

~4; LXXI—-12; LXXXVI—21, 37; XC—1-15; XCVII—9 


JACKAL-EATERS. - XVI--35 
JADED. a XCII—1 
JAGGORY. X—8; XLIII—-38; LXXVII—10, 16; CV—8 
Mars presides over— ae xX VI—14 

_ Karkataka presides over— 8 ALI-- 4. 
JAGHANACHAPALA. ie CIV—3 
JAGHANYA. LXIX—31, 33, 34 
JAHAKA. .» LXXXVI-—42 
JAIGELSITAVYA., se8 XLVITI —64 
JAILORS. si XVI—33 
JAIN MONK. = LI~21 
JAINS. i LVIiI—45 
JALA KETU. a XI—46 
JAMBU. LI—17; LV—4, 10} LXXXV—7 
JAMBU FRUITS. XXIX—4 
JAMBU TREE. LIV—8-10, 86, 87, 119 
JANGALA. re IX—29 
JANMA. er IIl—14 
JARADGAVA. ie IX—1, 4 
JARADGAVEE. oe. TX—3 
JARANA. oe V—81, 88 
JATADHARAS. oe XALV—13 
JATAMAMSEE., XVI—25; LXXVII—9 
JATARANGA, or ALV—8 
JATASURA. ae XIV—30 
JATEER. .. LXXVII—37 
JATILA. ies LXV—9 
JAUNDICE., IX—43; XXXII—14 
JAVALIN. = LVIUI—41 


JAWS. - VITI—48; LVIQ—5; LXVI—2; LXVII—-7 


132 INDEX 


JAW-BONE. ss LII—3 
JAYA VIN—38; XLIII—40; LITI—48, 49; NCIX—2 
JAYANTA. LIII-——43, 50, 54, 55, 63 
JEEVAS. ..  RLVIT—6 
JEEVAKAS. XLVIIN--6; LIX--6 
JEEVANTEE. .. MLVIITT—39 
JESAMINE, XI--14, XXIX—5, L--Zl 
JESAMINE CREEPER, di LV—4 
JESAMINE SCENT. .. LXXVIIT-7 
JESTLERS. ai XIX—12 
JEWELS. XVI—7; XLII--8; LXXX—I, 2; LXXXVII—4 
JEWE .LERS. sae V--74 
JEWELRY. Sa XV—12 
JINA. es LVITI-~-45 
JOCULAR., oT LALX--34 


JOIN TS.—belong to the masculine class of limbs. [I-8 [XIX 
—33; LXX—~—1i; DLXXII—6 
JOURNEYS. XLIII--37; LXXIX~23; LXXXVI-—5, 10, 1], 
40, 47, 51, 55, 56, 62; LXXXVII-—-5, 6, 28; LXXXIX— 
12, 14, 15, 16; XCV—28, 41, 52, 60; XCVIII-—9, 13 


JOVIAL CYCLE. rr VIII-~-26 
JOY. VIlI-- 42; LXXXIX—10; XCV—50 
JRINGAS. o XIV—21 
JUDGES. a. XXXIX—2 
JUGGLERS. XV—20; XVI—19 
JUGGLERY. - XIX—10 
JUICES. IX—26; XLI—4; XLU—4; XLVII[—41 
JUICE VENDORS. ‘a X—8 
JUJUBE. LI~17; LXXXV—5 
JUJUBE FRUITS. 7 LXIl—2 
JUJUBE TREE. LIV—16, 17, 43, 72, 74, 75, 114; XXIX—5 
JAMBU TREE, LIV—8, 9, 86, 87, 119 
JUMNA, XVI—2; XLIII—32; LXIX—26 
JUNCTURE. .. XXX—1, 2 
JUNGLE BIRD. ..  XLVI~-66 


JUPITER. IV—21; V—66; VIII—1, 15, 16, 17, 22, 27, 53; 
IX—37, 38, 42; X-—19; XI—19; XVI-—25; XVII—6, 13, 


INDEX 133 


16, 18, 21, 26, 27; “KVIII—4; XIX—15; XX—7; XXVIII 
—2l; XXXIV—-13; XL—3, 4, 5, 6; XLI—9; XLiIi— 
48. XLVI—11; XLVII—5; LX—20; LXIx—2, 5: 
XCVI—1; XCVIII—5; CIII—1-12; CIV—4, 235, 

26, 27, 28, 29, 30, 31, 5! 
JUSTICE, XIX—Ll; XXVII—9 
JYESHTA. IV—5; VII—10; VIII—10; IX—3, 18, 32; X— 
2, 13; XI—58; XV--16, 30; XXII—1; XXIII—~—6; XXXII 
--16; XXXIII~19; XLVI~86; XLVII—6, 12, 18: 


CI-—10; CII-- 4 
JYESHTA MASA. oe XXIHI--1 
JYOTEE RASA, me LXXX—5 
JYOTISHIKA. ae II—18, 20 
JYOTISHMATEE. XLVIII—39; LIV-~87 
JYOTIS SASTRA. eee 1rd, 29 
K 
KA, XI—38; NCV-—-50 
KABANDHA KETUS. bee XI—27 
KACHA. ae LIiI—40 
KACHCHAS. _ XIV—16 
KACHCHAPAS. wae V—40 
KACHCHARAS, ig XIV—27 
KAD, sss XCV—55 
KADAMBA. AXVII-7; LXXXV--5 
KADAMBA TREE, LIV~-38, 78, 101, 119; LV—10; 
) LXXIX—16 
KADRU. .. XLVITI—57 
KAGAKU. se XCV—53 
KAHA KAHA. ee LEXXVITI—16 
KAIKAYAS, V—74; XIV—25; XVI—-26; XVII—18 
KAILASA, XIV-—-24; LVI~17 


KAILAVATA. se XIV—26 


134 


KAKA. 

KAKATI. 
KAKKHAKHA. 
KAKHATA. 
KAKKOLA. 
KAKUBHA. 
KAKUBHA TREE. 
KAKODUMBARA. 
KALA. 
KALABAL.\. 
KALAHAKARIKA 
KALAJINAS. 
KALAKA. 
KALAKOTI. 
KALAMA RICE. 
KALVYA., 
KALAYUKTI, 
KALI. 


INDEX 


XCV --53 
XCV-—-53 
XCV—52 
XGV-=52 
LXXVI1--37 

LIV- -76, 119 
XLIV—4 

LIV--19 

A127 

es TI—14 
.. LXXXVUI--6 
XIV-—11 

XIV—19; LXAIX-~-—32, 35 
XLV-~4 

XIX--6; XXIXN-—-2 
XCV—-54 

ViIIT—~—48 
XCIX-—-I;. C2 


KALINGAS. V—35, 69, 75, 79; IX—10, 26, X—16; XI--54; 
XIV—8, 32; XVI~1; XVII—13, 22; XXXTI—15; LXAXX—7 


KAMBOJAS. 


KAMPILLAKA TREE. 


KANADA., 

KANAKA COMETS. 
KANCHI. 

KANKA, 

KANKANAS. 
KANKATAS. 
KANTAKARI. 
KANTHADHANAS. 
KANTAKASTTHALA. 
KANTIPURA. 
KANWA. 
KANYA., 
KAPALA KETU. 
RAPAIT JKA. © ‘ 


V—35, 78, 80; XI—57; XITI—9; XIV—17; 


XVI-—1, 16 
LIV —21 
7 
X1—18 
si XIV—~—15 
XI—26; XIV-—-4 
XIV—12 
XIV—12 
LIV—57 
XIV~—26 
XIV—10 
XVI—11 
XLVITI~-65 


V—39; XII—15; XLI—5; XLII~7; CII—3 


XI—-31, 32 
LI—20; LXXXVII-—22 


INDEX 135 


KAPALAVRATA. | =. IX—25 
KAPIKACHCHU. .. XLIV--10 
KAPILA. sat I--7 
KAPILAS. aah XIV -17 
KAPINJALA. XLVIII—6; LXXXVI -22 
KAPISTTHALA., XIV—4; LXXXVI~—1 
KAPOTAKEE. .. LXXXVHI—5 
KAPOTAPALI. zi LVI—30 
KAR.\, ; = XCV—51 
KARAKARA. . .LXXXVII—16 
KARAGAU. ae XCV -54 
KARAJA. - LIV -101 
KARANAS. TI—15; XLIU--12; C—I1, 2; Cll[l—13 
KARANJA. XXIX—5; LIV--33; LXXXV--4 
KARAVEERA LXXXV~—6; L—21 
KARAVEERA LEAF, ae L—-7 
KARAYIIKAS. | LXXXVIII—4, 16 
KARCHURA., .. LXXVII—14 
KARKATAKA., IlI--2, 45 V—38; XLI—4; XLII—5 
KARMANEYAKA., a XNIV--15 
KARNAPRAVEYAS, os XIV—18 
KARNATIC. a XIV—-13 
KARNIKARA, LIV—59; LXXX—9 
KARPURA., .. ULXXVII—13 
KARSAPANAS, .. LXXX—13 
KARSELAS. LXXX—12; LXNXXI—9 
KARTIKA, V—69; VII—18; VIII—2, 3; XXI—5; XLIV—2 
KARVATA. XIV—5; XVI—13 
KASHMIR, V—70, 77, 78; XIV--29 
KASHMIRA. IX—18; XI—57 
KASHMIRIS, X—12 


KASI, V--72; IX—19; X—4, 13; XI—59; XIV-7; XVII 

—25; XXXII—19 
KASI KING. | LXXVII—-1; I1X—19 
KASMARI. XLIV—12; LXXIX—2; LXXXV—3 
-KASYAPA, V—2; XXI--2; XXIII—4; XXIV—2; XXVI--5; 
- - XLVITI—65; XLIX—1; LVIII—29; XC--7 


136 INDEX 


KATA KATA. “ XCV—51 
KATAKA NUTS. = LIV—121 
KATAMBARA, at XLIV—9 
KATAYA CORN. - XLI—5 
KATE KATE. - XCV—56 
KATUKLI KOTUKLI. .-LXXXVIII—17 
KATYAYANA. ..  XLVII—65 
KAULAVA, om C--1, 3 
KAULINDAS. = 1V—24 
KAUNINDAS. ~ XIV—30 
KAURAVAS. IV—24; IX—30 
KAUSAMBEE, - XVI—3 
KAUSHMANDA. ..  LVIlI—71 
KAUSIKEE. a XVI—16 
KAUSTUBHA GEM. XLIU—3; LVINI—31 
KAVA. ” XCV—50 
KAVATA. . - XVI—26 
KAVERI. XIV~—13; V—64 
KEELAKA. WI—17; VIlN—43 
KEERA. IV—23; XIV—29 
KEKA. vee LAX VITI-=25 
KEKAYAS. I1V—22; V—-67; XI—60 
KEKE, ae XCV—51 
KENDRA. XXVII—1l, LXIX~—1; LXXVIII—25 
KERALA. XIV—12; XVI—11 
KESADHARAS, st XIV—26 
KESARA. - LIX—6 
KESAVA. ..  ~=CV—14, 16 


KETUS. IlI-—7; V-—95; XI-—1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7-12, 22, 23, 

24, 25, 26, 28, 50, 51, 52, 57; XVI—-39; XXI-~-25, XXIII 

—10; XXXIV—15, 18; XXXVITI-—-8 XLVI—82; 
XLVII--12, 14, 15; XLVITI—83 

KHACHARA. a XIV—28 

KHADIRA. XXVI-—9; XLIV—12; LIX-—5, LXXXV—5; 
LXXXVI—80; LXXXVITI—5 

KHADIRA TREE. er XXIX—11 

KHAM KHAM. we. LXXXIX—16 


INDEX 137 


KHANDAS. XIV—18 
KHANDARIS. x—7 
KHANJ ANA. II—(18) 
KHANJANAKA. XLV—1; LXXXVIII—20 
KHARA., VIII—37 
KHARE KHARE. XCV—52 
KHASAS. X—12; XIV—6,30; LXIX—26 
KHASTTHAS. XIV—22 
KIDNAPPING. XCI~2 
KILKILI. .. LXXXVILI-~-22 
KILIKILKILI ..LXXXVII—21 
KILKULI. »- LXXXVIN—I1 
KIMPURUSHAS. XLVIL—62 
KIMSTUGHNA. C—2, 5 
KINDLER OF PASSIONS, LXXVII—7 
KINDNESS. LXIX—8 
KINE. VIII—42 


KING. ILI--18, 30, 32, 33; IV—9, 10, 21, 24, 28; V—Z2I, 26, 


32, 37, 48, 60, 64, 65, 66, 76, 95; VI—-7, 8, 13; VIII—4, 
7, 8, 10, 11, 46, 50; IX—43; X—8, 13, 16; XI—52, 54; 
XIV—32, 33; XV—2, 6, 10; XVI—5, 14, 23, 41; XVH— 
5, 8, 14, 17; XVIII—2, 3, 4; XIX—9, 10; XXIV—27, 343 
XXVI~-8; XXVII—9; XXIX--9; XXX—16, 19, 23, 28, 
30; XXXI—1, 2, 5; XXXII-~-14, 18, 28, 29, 32; XXXIII 
—11, 12, 13, 17, 20, 25, 30; XXXIV—6, 8, 9, 11, 13, 17, 
18, 21, 22; XXXV—2, 7; XXXVI—1, 2, 3, 4; XXXVII— 
2, 3; XXXVIN—1, 5; KXXIX~2; XLII-—2; XLIII—8, 
20, 22, 29, 32, 34, 35, 56, 59, 62; XLIV—13, 17, 19, 20, 
22, 23, 24, 25, 26; NLV—5, 1], 14, 15; XLVI—3, 7, 8, 
9, 13, 17, 18, 19, 29, 32, 38, 43, 62, 64, 68, 74, 81, 82; 
XLVII—5, 7, 9. 10, 16, 25, 26; XLVIII—1, 3, 21, 48, 50, 
54, 72, 73, 75, 79, 80, 81, 82, 87; XLIX—2, 6, 8; L~6; 
Li—11, 20, 44; LIII—8, 24, 31, 36; LIV—111; LVII— 
50; LXVIH—8; LXVIII—2, 4, 5, 6, 8, 9, 11, 17, 18, 20, 
21, 23, 24, 26, 27, 28, 32, 35, 38, 44, 45, 51, 54, 79, 81, 
84, 88, 95, 102, 103, 115; LXIX—6, 11, 18, 30; LXXII 
—~3; LXXII~—3; LXXIV~—3; LXXIX—14, 25; LXXx— 


B. §. 18. 


238 INDEX 


Ty 18; LXXXI -22, 27, 30; LXXXII--6; LXXXVI—34,: 
64, LNXXVIJI—-19, 33; XCII—1; XCIN—-2,.13) XCIV==: 
9,°/14; XCV-19, 20, 62 


KING’S CHILDREN. " V—8¢+ 
KING'S. MOTHER. + XLIII—66 
KING’S SERVANTS. 7 X—18 
KING'S SON. - 3 me V—33 
KING'S. WIFE. e XXXINM--25 


KINGDOM. VIIIT—51; XXXII[—27, 29; XNNVIII—6; XLIV 
—21; XLVI—39; XLVILI—83; XLIX--7, 8; LXXLV--1, 17 


KINGSHIP. LXVIUI—75; LXX—12; LXXVII—4 
KINNARAS. ° ~ fe XVI~35 
KINSMEN. LILI—41; XCV—10 
KIRAS. : .»  -XXXII--19 
KIRANAS, a XI—10 


KIRATAS, V--80; IX—35; XI—60; AIV—18, 30; XVI—2; 
XXXI[—-19, 22 


KIRATA CHIEFTAIN. — IX—17 
KIRATA KING. | a XI—54 
KIRTI. | ws XLVILI—57 
KISHKINDHIAS. 7 XIV—~10 
KISL KIS. | .. LXXNVIL 36 
KITH AND KIN, XIV—13; LNIX—17; LXNN--18 


KNEE, L{f—9, 31; LII—7; LUL53, 5!; LYII--22; LXV! 
1, 2; LXVII~—4, 6; LXIX—30; LX\—2; LNXXIX -11 


KNEE CAPS, ae LVHI—17 
KNOTS. ww) LXXIX-37 
KNUCKLE, LXVIU- 87; LXX—11 
KODRAVA. XXIX—6,; LXXVII~2 
KOHALAS. ee XIV--27 
KOLAKSHA, LXXIX—~-32, 33, 36 
KOLLAGIRI, sete XIV--13 
KONKANS.. os XIV—12 
KOPACHCHADA, ow. LXXVII—11 
KOSA. | «a. AAS, 8, 9 
KOSADHYAKSHA., ’ we LXXXVI—-29 


4 


or rt wd 


AIRDEX "139 


KOSALAS, V--69, 70; IX-26; X—4, 9, 13,'14; XIV—7, 8; 
XVI—6; XVII~22; Lxxx—6 ~ 


KOTIVARSHA, IX—I1 
KOUNKANA XVI—11 
KOVIDARA TRED. XXIX —13; LIV—27 
KRAK AR AS. ALViTI—6 
KRAKKA.  LXXXVIST—30 
KRATU. ATU—6, 11; XLVII—63 


KRAONCHA ALV~-2t; LVI -5,6; LXXXVI —22, 27; XC'U-7 


KRAUMCILA FSLAND. 
KRA YADAS. 
KALINGA. 

LRN VVARKE, 

KAP NO WU. 
KRoEStts \, 

KhIS IN\ VELLURU, 


XN 718, XIV -13 


XIV-~-18 


oe LAXNVITE—25 


LXXXVIE—7 


LXXXVILI ~34 


LV W{~37 
Ni \—1]4 


KROPA LUGA, bis iveraG 
KKOD A we LXXNAVHT-9 
Kitt PRE ANAA. Millers] 
KRODIL. VItT—41 


KSHALLIYA. IV —24, 31; V—29, 32, 59, 73, IN—16, 3., 
X al, MV—23, XVIT- 14, 26 XVIU-2, fp XXVL—, 
RN .--16; XXXI--3; XXNUI—11, 18, XNixby -14, 


ANAVI-1; ALVIT—11; 


LIlI—13, 8); LIX—»5; 


TN 3}: eS AN 1s GNA X Vis 
KSHATRIYA CLASS N\V—28 
KSHAY \. VIII—52 
KSHEERIKA. XXIX—2 
KSHEMA, ALVII—41 
KSHEMA DHORTAS. XIV—~23 
KSHEVWVA TREE, LAXXV—3 
KSHIPRA NAKSHATRAS, ACVIIL—9 
KSTITIRODA, NLV—6 
KSHUDRA MEENAS. ALV—~24 
KSHURARPANA. ALVY~20 


KUBERA,  NV—19, 21; XXXIV—3; 


NLIIN—52;  LVPI~37 


140 
KUBERA HRIDAYA. 


¢ 


XLVITI—71 


KUBJA, LXVII—9; LXIX—31, 35 
KUCHA KUCHA. wo LXXXVIII—45 
KUCHIKAS. XIV—30 
KUDAVA. CIV—46 
KUDYAMATSYA. .. LXXXVIHI~8 
KUHAKAJNA. LXXXVI—32 
KUHU. XLVIII—57 
KUKU. XCV—51 
KUKURAS. V—71; XIV—4; XXXII—22 
KUKKUTA. .. LXXXVIII-7 
KULA. LIV—100 
KULALAKUKKUTIA, .. LXXXVII—8 
KULUKULU. .. LXXXVIIT—35 
KULUTAKAS, IV—22 
KULU AS. X—11, 12; XIV—22, 29 XVII~18 
KUMBHA. V—42; HXLI—7; XLII~11; CI—6 
KUMUDA. IV—30; !XI—14, 43; LIV—23 
KUNDA. IV—15 
KUNDA BIRDS. LXX—6 
KUNDURU. LVII—5 
KUNDURUKA, LVII—3; LXXVII—8 
KUNINDA. XIV—33 
KUNJARA. LVI—17, 25 
KUNJARADAREE. ‘XIV—16 
KUNKUMA KETUS. XI—21 
KUNTA. LXVIII—47 
KUNTALA. XVI—11 
KUNTIBHOJAS. i X—15 
KURABAKA. v LXXXVHI-~4 
KURANTA BLOSSOM. XLIN—33 
KURAVAKA, XXIX—8; LIV~119 
KURU. XIV—4 
KURU COUNTRY. os X1V--24 
KURUS. IV—25; V—33; \IX—29, 34, XXXU-—I1 
KURUKSHETRA. vo Ver; XE-57 
KURU KURU. oh XCV--51 


INDEX 141 
KURUVINDA. .. LXXXU—2 
KUSA. eis LIV—100 
KUSU KUSU. ... LXXXVIH—39 
KUSUMA. ss XIV—14 
KUSUMADANTA, LIlI—44, 49, 53 
KUTAJA, aC RXIX—12 
KUTAPURI, LXXXVI—20, 44; LXXXVIII—4 
KUTILA. 7 LXV—9 
KUTTAKA, ne LKV—9 
KWA KWA KWA. .LXXXVUI~27 
L 
LABOURER. LI—25; LXXXVII—20 
LAC. X—11; XI—11; LVII—5; LXXVviI—9 


LADY. Amorous—ies yielding to their lovers when XXIV-—~31 
A house where the—ies speak as sweetly as 


cuckoos. .- AMLVITI-—14 

A mole on the face of—ies. aa L—9 

A-~ will come within sight. .» LXXXVII—26 
-~ies of nobility, ee V—-37 
A~—of the house will be an adulteress if .... LXXXIX—8 
LADLES. er XLVI—63 


LAGNA. Ii—(15); XXVMI—1; XLV—16; LX-—20; LXXVIII 
25; CII—1, 13 


LAKE, Tanks and—s will dry up. XIX—20; XXXII—14 
The quantity of rain will vary according to the 
heaviness of—water. oe XXVI-—-7 
A wagtail on holy—s tends to prosperity. ... XLV—4 
Inundations of—s in the rainy season, sa XLVI--89 
Ablution may be performed in a— «. XLVIEHI--9 
God dwells near the—s, ae LVI—+4 
LAKSHMANA, is LIV—48 


LAKSHMI XLVIII—57; CIV—36 


3442 ZINDEX 


LAMP.” .! on «=  ETSES 
LANCE. we ~ LXVHT47 
LANDS? ° Produce of—will be plentiful. wee WITE31 
‘Célestial portent to be warded off by gift f= ." XLVI-6 
&Ruih of kings and their— ; XLVI—8 
“ One's thoughts will be about—if we & lei 
Destruction of— LI-19 
V'eLoss of—... LXXIUI-~5 
N’ Ghin of if. .LXNKXIX <i{c} 
. +. Cultivation of — C~—4 
LAND PLAGUES. XN1IV-~33 
LANDED PROPERTY. ILA—5 
LANKA. AIV--11 
LASCIVIOUSNESS, 7 XLVI—85 
LATAS. 5 LXIX—11 
LAUGHTER. LXVII--74; LAAAVI - 22 
LAUFHETYA., XIV~—6 See also Lohitya. 
LAVAS. XLVILI--59 
LAWLESS MEN. XVI—-37 
LAZY. VINI-—45; LXNIXN-Y 
LEAD, - LVI!{--8 
LEADER OF MEN. LXIN- 
LEAN. LXVI{1—30 
LEAPING. LXVIIJ—115 


LEARNED, V--20, 42, 65; 


' 


LEARNING. LXVITI-—-104; 
LBATHERN ARTICLES. 


LEAVES. 
LEFT HOOEFS. 
“LEGS 


LEGUMINOUS SEEDS. 


LEHA. ’ 
LEMON.. 
LENTILS. 
LEO. , 
TROGPARDS 


XV--10; XVI--22; LXIX-~35; 
CI—5, 12 

LXIX—20; LXXIX—13; CI—~7 

.. LXXXVI—35 

XLVI-—-95; XCV-~12 

XCII—10 

LXVI~2; LXXIX~—18 

XLI—5 

ai V—-43, 45 

ie LV~—4, 1¢ 

/ XLI—<2 

Cll? 

. LXXXVE22 


INDEX] 148! 


LETTER. iA ve LXXX DOM tras 
LDETTER-BEARERS. we of REARS, 
LIARS,. - we td PMV 4, 
LIBATIONS. ee XLVITI~18 
LIBERAL. Seg CI—6, 12 
LIFE, , ‘fee XLIX~7 
LIGHT. 1V-—-2; LXXXIV—2 


LIGH! NING. Il1—33; V—58, 93; IX—41; XXI—16, 22;¢25, 

31, 32, 37; XKII—5; XXIV—15, 17, 25; XXV=+5; 

XXVH—7; XXVIII—10, 12, 16; KXX—8,]31, ‘32; 

XXXI—17, 21; XXXIII-—2, 5; XXX1V—8; XLIII 

63; XLVI—20, 84, 88; XILVII—23; L—22; 

LXXX—14; XCV--36'"' ~ 

LILIES. XIX—5; XXIX~—10; XLI—3,; L—21; LXXVI+<3; 
| LXXXII—1 

LIMBS. II—(2); L—11; LI—1; LITI~—59; LXVIII--83, 111; 
LXIX—10, 24; XCV—~—38, 39; CI-—8 

LIME. Ls LXXVII-~-36 

LINES ON THE PALM. sas LI~8 

LIONS. XLIII[--57; KXLVIII—13; LXil—1]; LXVH-+2; 
LXVIII—103, 1. 

LION'S SKIN. ... XLI—4; NLVIIT3-44 

LIP. LI-8, 33; LVIUN+8, 9; LXI—10; LXIf-i; LXVI— 

1, 3; LAVIL—6; LXVII—87; LXIX 10; LAN~o, 20, 23, 25 

LIQUOR. XLVHI~-20; LXVUI—16; LXAVI--11; XCV—22 


LIPERATORE. wa LXIX—8 
LIVELIHOOD. | ae Vi 
LIZARDS. XXAUIT-9; LI-33; LIV—-13, 16, 69; LANXVI 
: 15. te 
LOAD BEARER ww. UXXXVIT24 
LOCKs. .. LXNAVITI-—3 
LOCUSTS. sa VOOA. NAL 
LODHRA. LI--15; LXXAVI—80 
LOFTY. « J sat LNIX-~14 
LOFTY HEIGHT. w. LXXXVE-74 
LOGIC, os wii XIX=—11 
LOHITYA.,. ,. 2°. : ee XVE~16 


144 INDEX 


LOINS. — see LVIII--% 
LOMASIKA. ost XC—2 
LONGEVITY. we XLVITL—86 
LONG LIFE. LXVIII--59; LXXIX—13; LXXXV—$S; 
CIlI—2, 11 


LONG-LIVED. LXVIII—6, 9, 23, 36, 42, 50, 60; LXX—~—14 
| LXXVIII—23; CIII—2, 11 
LOOK. we LXXXVI—6 


LORDS. LIV—3; LXVIII—23, 46; LXXXVI-~-75 
LORDSHIP. iis LI—23 


LOSS OF WEALTH. V—21; LI—16; LII~4, 7; LII— 

67, 90; LXXIX—5 
LOST ARTICLE. .. LXXXVII—S5 
LOTUS XV—25; XVI—28; XIX—5, 16; XXIX—10; 
XXXIJI—10; XLIJI—33, 36; XLV—6; XLVI—33, 70; 
L—2; LI—19; LII—29; LIV—100; LVI—4; LVIII 
41, 44; LXVIIT—~45; LXIX~15, 17, 24 LXX 

1, 2; LXXI—13; XCV—23 


LOTUS FILAMENTS. aa XXX—20 
LOTUS PONDS, .»  XLVII~—10 
LOTUS STALK. ..  LXVILN—46 
LOUSE. sae LVIIi—2 
LOVE.  VIII-—-36; XIX—18; LXXVII—35; LXXVILI—3, 
4-6; C—3 
LOVERS. XV—3; XVI—8, 29; XIX—5; XXIV—31 
LOVING DAMSEL. we LXXVIII—12 
LOWBORN PERSONS. a8 XV—27 
LOW CLASS PEOPLE. IX—13; V—28, 41, 68 XV—23; 
X VI—36 
LOW SOUND. w. LXXXVI—63 
LOYAL. sa CI—$ 
LUCK. LXI—17, 19; LXV—1, 4; LXVII~8 
LUMINARIES IN ECLIPSED CONDITION. V—60 
LUNAR ECLIPSE. II~-(10); V~8, 12, 26 
LUSTRE. — LXVIII—89, 90, 91, 92,-93, 94 
LUSTRE-LESS. te LXXX—15 


LUSTRATION. . XLIV—I, 2, 15, 22: XLV—11 


INDEX 145 


LUSTROUS. eve LXx—1 


LUSTRUM. VIII—21, 24, 35 
LUTE. XIX—18; LXIX—22, 29; LXXVI—2 
LUXURIOUS. 26 CI—10 
M 
MACE. LVII—33, 40; LXIX—17 
MAD CAPS. XLVI--97; LXVIII—74 
MADANA. 7 a LVII—5 
MADAYANTIKA. ..  LIV—102 
MADDER. X11; XLIV—9; XLVIII~39; LVII—S; 
LXXVII—6 
MADHAVA. a CV—14 
MADHUKA. XXIX—4; LI~17; LIV—35, 119; LIX—6; 
: LXXXV—3 
MADHUSUDANA. - CV—14 
MADHYAMIKA i XIV—2 
MADHYATAMA. | V43, SL 
MADHYA VIDARANA. ..  -V—81, 89 
MADNESS. ..  XXXII—10 
MADRA. Iv—22; V—40; K—4; XIV—22, 33; XVII—18; 
XXXII—19 
MADRAKAS. XI-~59; XIV--27 
MAGAS. LX—19 


MAGADHA. IV-—-22, 26; V—69, 79; X—10, 14, 16; XI— 
55, 56; XIV—6, 32; XVI—-1]; XXXII—I11 
MAGHA, IV—6, VI—8; VIII—19; IX—2, 14, 28; X~—7; XI 
~~-56; XIII—3; XV—8, 28; XXI-—~-29; XXIII—7; XXXII 
12; XXXIII—-19; XLVII—5, 18; LIV~—123; LXXI 
—3, XCVII—15; CI-~-6; CII—3, 7 


MAGHA. V-—72; VIII-—6, 27; XXI-—-10, 30; XXV—5 
MAGIC, V—41; XVI~19; XIX~—10 
MAGICAL WOMEN. ase LXIX--37 


140 


INDEX 
MAGNITUDE, — V—18 
MAHAGREEVAS. XIV—-9 
MAHANADEE, XVI -10 
MAHARASHTRAS. X—8 
MAHARAUHINA. XLVIII—71 
MAHATAVEE. XIV—13 
MAHAVRATA. XXIV—8 
MAHAVRATA. HYMN. XXVI—1 
MAHENDRA. XIV—11; XVI—10 
MAHISHA. IX—10 
MAHI RIVER. XVI—32 
MAHISHAKAS. XVII--26 
MAHOUTS. IX—28; XV—19; XCIV~—9 
MAID SERVANT. LI—13; 25 
MAIDEN. LXX—-1 
MAKARA, IlI—-2; V—41; XLI—7; NLII—-11, Cl—5 
MAKSHEEKA., LXXVI—3 
MALAKARA. LXXXVI—32 
MALAVYA. LXIX—2, 7, 10, 12, 33 
MALAWAS, 1V—24; «XXXIT—19 
MALATI. XVI -10 
MALAYA. XIV—11; XVI—10; LXXVII—14 
MALE. LXXIV~-20; LAXVI—1l; LXXXVI—8 
MALE BIRTH. LXXVIN— 24 
MALEFIC. VII 20 
MALEFICS. XLI—10, 11, 13; SLIW-14 
‘MALICIOUS, XLVI—76 
MALINDYA HILLS. XIV—11 
MALLAS. i V—38 
MALWA. XIV—27; XVI—26; XXXII—19; LXIX—11 
MALYAVAN. XIV—5 
MAN. H—4; LXVIII—105-112; LXXV—6; LAXNIX—]; 
ee XxCV—14 
MANAHALAS. X1V—-27 
.MANASA LAKE, er  SUl+8 
*MANAVAKA. .. “\y. LXXXI--33 
MANDA, 


oes LKVII—2, 4, s) 


INDEX 147, 


rey ed 


MANDALA. 6 1X—10, 
MANDARA, - LVI—17, 21; LXXXI—34; CVI—1. 
MANDALAKA. . LXIX~31, 37 
MANDATE. ~~ XCVIII—14 
MANDAVYA. XIV—2, 22, 27; CIV—3 


MANES. VIUI—6, 23; XV—8, XLVI—10; XLVII[—25, 
30, 69; XCVIII—4; XCIX—2; C—5 


MANGERS. XXXIII—22; XLV--5; LII[—16 
MANGOES. XXIX—11; LI~17; LIV—119; LIX~6 
LXXXVI—80 
MANGO JUICE. .. LXXVII—27 
MANHOOD. ..  LXXVI—12 
MAN]. .. LXV—-3, 11 
MANIKETU. ae XI—44 
MANIMAT HILL. ae XIV—20 
MANI SOPANA. -» LXXXI—35 
MANKIND. IlI—5, 39; IV—8, 16; VIII—53; XXXI-~5 
MAN'S FAULT. ies LI—16 
MAN SERVANT. se LI—25 
MANMATHA. VIII—38; XCIX—1 
MANSIONS. XLV—4; LIII~34; LVI—4; LXXIV—1; 
LXXXVI—17; LXXXIX—6; XCV—34 
MANTRISHIKA. on XVI—11 
MANU. XIX—11; XLII[—39, 51; XLVIII—61; LIV~110; 
LVI~—31 
MARCHERS. IX—35; XXXIV—14, 22; XXXIX—5 
MARCHING, sat XLIII—37 
MARES. an XLVI—53. 
MARE'S MILK. Ss L—24 
MARGARAS. - XIV~18 
MARGASIRA. V—70; VIII~—4; XXI—6, 9, 19, 30 
MARICHI. II-—-(18); XIJI—5, 8; XLVIII—63 
MARINERS. - X{V—14 
MARINE PRODUCTS. , LXXXVII—10, 23 
MARITAL ALLIANCE. .»» LXXXVI—70 
MARITAL. HAPPINESS. we.  LXX—6 
‘MARKANDEYA: . o XLVII-66 


148 , INDEX 

MARKS. ° : - LIi—10 
MARRIAGES, JI—14; XLIII—37; LXXI—8; XCVIII—3, 

14; C—7, 8; CIN—13 
MARROW. XXVII—5; XLVI~—40; L—22; LXVIII—96, 98; 

LXIX—21 
MARS, IV—21, 24; V—60, 64; VI—1-13; IX~38, 41; XI 
—21; XV—31l; XVI—15; XVII—13, 15, 19, 23, 25, 27; 
XVIII—2; XIX~9; XXIH—10; XXVIII—21; XXXIV 
—11; XL—7, 10; XLVII—14; LXIX—2, 5; XCVII 
—1; CIlI~1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 

CIV--4, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 49 


MARTHI. o XVI—26 
MARUCHIPATTANA. - XIV—15 
MARUKUCHCHAS, sas XIV—23 
MARUS. .. -V=40, 68 
MARUT. XXIV-~-8; XLII—52; XLVIII—55 
MARUTA. - C—~2 
MARWAR. 7" XIV—2 
MARWAREE, Y IV—22 
MASA. ” H—(4) 
MASCULINE LIMBS. “ LI—8 
MASCULINE QUARTERS. .. LXXXVI—75 
MASHAKAS. w ~~ LXXAI-9 
MASHAPARNEE. a LIV—88 
MASSACRE OF MEN. - XCV—31 
MASURAKA. we XLNT--43 
MATANGA. .. LXXXVI—30 
MATANGA COUNTRY. .. LXXX—7 
MATERIALS, XLI—14; XLVII—23 
MATHEMATICIANS. XV—12; XVI-18 
MATHKUNA. 2 LXVII—10 


MATHSYAS, V—38; IX—18; XIV—2; XVI—22, XVII—22, 
XXXII—11; LXVII—44 


MATHURAS, 1V—26; XIV—3 
MATING. ws LXXXVI-66 
MATULANGA. wa“ LV 4, 10 


MAURVI, ie LIV—87 


INDEX 149 


MAXIMUM. LIFE. ae LXX—13 
MAYA. XXIV—2; LVI—29; LVII—8 
MAYURA CHITRAKA. 1I—(18); XLVII—2 
MEAL. LXXVI—12; LXXXIX—17 
MEASURE. L~6; LIN—17 
MEASURES OF MERCURY’S RISING AND SETTING. 
ViII—12, 13 
MEAT. XLVIJI—28, 30; LI~33; LXXXVII—10; LXXXIX—1 
MECHANICS. a XVI—18 
MEDICINES. XV—17; XVI—5; XIX—1; C—5 
MEENA. V—42; XLI—8; XLII—12; Cll—6 
MEETING. 7 XX~8 
MEGHAVAT HILL. - XIV—20 
MEN, XXI—17; XLIV—1; XXXIII—4; XLVI~22; LXXI 
—9, 11, 13 
MEN OF EMINENCE. us V—36 
MENDICANTS. X—8; LXXXVII—3, 24 
MENSES. LXXIV--9; LXXVIII—21 
MENSTRUAL BLOOD. .. LXXVITI—19 
MENTAL ABERRATION. .. XLIU—65 
MENTAL AFFLICTION. L—17; LIUI—89; LXXXVII—45 
MENTAL QUALITIES. - LXIX—3 
MERCHANDISES. XV—2, 9, 11; XVI--17 


MERCHANTS. IX—43; XV-—-5, 8; XVI--29; XVII—26,; 
XXXI~—4; XXXIII--25; XXXNIX—3; LI—21; 
LXXXVI—34; LXXXVII—12 


MERCHANT CLASS, see XV—-29 
MERCILESS. a CI—7 
MERCURIC SULPHIDE. - LIV—110 


MERCURY. IV—21; VII—1-20; IX—38, 43; XI—20; XVI 
—20; XVII—6, 13, 15, 20, 23, 27; XVIII~3; XIX— 
12; XXVIII—21; XXXIV—14; XL—4, 5, 6; XLI 
—9; LXIX—2, 5; LXXVI-—3; XCVIH—1; 

CIII—1-12; CIV—19-24, 50 
MERIT. LXXIV—6; LXXV-—9 
MERITORIOUS DEEDS. .. LXXXVII-43 
MERITORIOUS MEN. -  .. LXXXVII—21 


150 INDEX 


MERU, XIV—24; XXIV~—2; XXVII—7; LVI-—17, 20 
MERUKA. we XIV—29 
MESSENGER. IX~-31; LXXXVII—8; XCV—22 
MESHA. V—35; XLI—2; CII—1, 7 
MESHA SANKRAMANA. 7 XLU~—3 
METALLIC VESSELS. 2 XLII—11 
METEORS. II—(18); IlI—33; V—16, 63, 93; XII[—22; 


XITI—7; XV—31; XXI-25; XXIV—25; XXX-—32; 
XXXII~13; XXXIII[~-8, 14, 15, 18, 19, 20-22, 23, 
29, 30; XXXIV—8; XLII-—1; XLVI—4, 86, 94 


METTLE. “ LXIX—4 
MICA. w= XLV—12 
MICE. - L—25 
MIDDAY. a IX—23 
MIDDLE. . LXXVIN—2¢4 
MIDDLE COUNTRY. XVII~19, 22; XVIII~—4 
MIDDLE DOOR. “a LVI—10 
MIDDLE FINGER, ed LVII—27 
MIDDLING EFFECTS. ie IX—8 
MID NIGHT. we LXXXIX—5 
MILCH COWS. ssi XXI—36 
MILD. se XV—10 
MILITANT PERSONS. ‘a XV—19 
MILITARY. V—35; XIX—10 
MILITARY MEN. we XVII—24 
MILITARY POPULATION. - 1V—-27 
MILITARY PROCLAMATION. ” 1I—(15) 


MILK. XIX—5; XXXII~26; XXXIV—4; XLV~-7; XLVI 
—26, 43; XLVIII-28; LI-—31; LV-—-7; LXXVI—4, 
6, 7, 8; XCV—Z3; CIII—4, CV--8 


MILK SUPPLY. . XVII—23 
MILKY, ..  XLVITI—46 
MILKY OCEAN. = XIV—6 
MILKY TREES. § XLVI—24; LIIT—86, 120; LIV—101; 

: LXXXIX—1; XCV—16 __ 
MIND, LXIX—14; LXXV—3, 4 


MINES. . XVI—15; XIX—10; LXXX—16 


pai, & 


INDEX 1 
MINERS., a XV—1 
MINERALS. V—68; DLXIX—20; XCV«e-21 
MINISTERS, II—(15); IV—25; V—30, 66, 67, 93; X—3, 12; 
X%V--6; XVI—-24, 29, 42; XXIX—9; XXX—19; XXXIV 
—13, 17; XXXV—5, 7; XXXVIII—3; XLIII—23, 64; 
XLVI~!2; LXVIII—18, 48; LIII—6, 8, 26, 89; 
LXVIII—60, 67; LXIX—27; LXXXIX—19; 


| XC—9 

MINUTES. .. XLVII—39 
MIRROR. IV—2; XLIII—57; LVIII—39 
MISCARRIAGES.  V—24, 93; XXI—25, 34; LXXXIX—5 
MISCHIEVOUS. ” CI-3 
MISDEEDS. w  RLVI-3 
MISER. LXVIII—56, 72, CI—13 
MISERABLE. LXVIII—5, 32,°106 
MISERLINESS. .  LXVIII—58 


‘MISERY. V—61; VI—6; XI—24; XXVI—11; XXX~13, 163 
XXXIV—13; XLVI~27; XLVII—14; L—4, 22; LIi— 
5; LIMN—60, 67; LXX—2l; LXXIV—3; LXXIX— 
28- LXXXIX~1, 10; XC—13; XCII—1; XCII 
—6; XCIV—10; CIII—2 


MISSILES. - XLI—6 
/MISUNDERSTANDING. a IX~—16 
MITHILA. ..X—14; XIV—6 
MITHUNA. V—37; XLI~—3; XLII—4 
MITRA. V—22; LII—47, 49; XCVIII—4 C—1 
MIXED CLASSES. - LINI—15 
MLECHCIIAS, V—29, 33, 54, 79; IX—13; XVI—1!1; XVII—I4 
MOATS. - XVI-6 


MOCK SUN. II[—-37; AXI--16; XXVITI—-16; XKXX-—8, 26, 
31, 33; KXXAVIT—1, 2, 3; XLU[—-1; XLVII-—-19 


_ MODEST. ..XV—10; CI~8 
“MOIST SOIL, LV 
MOLE. a L—9 
, MOMENTS. ” we RLVUI-59 


| MONARCHS. * XV—16, 24; XIX~3; XXVII~5;" XXKViR8 
MONEY. ° Li--16; LII—3; LII—41, 66, 89; LXVVI~70; 


1§2 | INDEX 


an ola wh dy 

LXXIX—11; LXXXVII—13, 38; LXXXIX—I} 
7 XCV—38; CI-~-7 
MONGOOSE. LIV—3?2, 71; LXXXVE@1; 43, 44 
MONKS. XX—19;) LKXXVII—22 
MONKEYS. XXIV—21; XXVII—3; XXXIH—9; LXVII— 
18, 37, 104; LXXXVI—28, 38, 42, 48; LXXXVII—9; 

LXXXVII—22 


MONSOON INDICATION. ise 11—(18) 
MONSTERS. | bps XLVI-—-78 
MONSTROCITIES. as XLVI—52 
MONTH. : V—-26 


MOOLA. IV—5; VII~—6, 11; IX—3, 32; X—2, 13; XI—59; 
XV—17, 29; XXIII—7; XXXII~—20; XXXIII—18; LV 
—31; LXXI—5; CI—10; ClII—4, 7 
MOON. IV—1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 
18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30, 31, 32; 
V—10, 19, 20; VIII—23, 24; XI—14, 22, 26; XV—3), 
XVI—8; XVIIT—1-8; XIX—2, 6; XXI—6, 7, 14, 16, 20, 30, 
33; XXII—4; XXIV—3, 4, 8, 9, 11, 12, 28, 29, 30, 31, 
32, 33, 34, 36; KXV—1, 4, 5, 6; XXVI~3, 10, 11, 12, 
13; XXVII—1, 7, 8; XXVIII—1, 6, 11, 15, 16, 19; XXX 
—2; XXXIII—10, 12, 13, 17; XXXIV—1, 9, 11, 16; XL 
~—5, 6, 7; XLIU—13, 14; XLIII—5@ XLIV—1, 27; 
XLVI—46, 86; XLVII—11, 16, 17, °¥8; XLVIII—45, 
82; LIV—3; LVIII—43; LX—20; LXVIII—94; LXIX 
—3; LXXVIII—25; LXXXI—7, 20, 28; “—LXXXVI—75; 
XCVII—1; XCVIII—4; XCIX—1; CIII—1-12; 
CIv—4, 8, 9, 10, 49, 56 


MOON'S DEFLECTION. 5g: V—18 
MOON'S ECLIPSE. ae V—91 
MOON-GEM. re LXXX—4 
MOON'S RAYS. eee LXAXVI—2Z 
MORAL WEAKNESS. 1 LXXIV—13 
MORNING. ae Li— 
MORNING TWILIGHT. we = XLVII--27 
MORTALS. + LXVITI—-108 


MORTALITY. VI~9;  XLVI—49 


INDEX 43 


MORTAR, LXVIN—48; LXXXIX—1 
MOTHER. XLVITI—26; L—8; LI~26, 37; LVIIT-56 
LX—19; LXIX~—20; LXXII—5 
MOUNT PRASTTHA. ses XIV—20 
MOUNTAINS. IV—23; V—42; IX—39; XV—2; XVI—2, 42; 
XIX—12; XXVIII—6; XXX—27; XXXII—3; XXXII 
—10; XXXVIII—1; XLIII—35; XLVI—89, 93; 
XLVII—67; LIV—102; LVI—8; LXIX—20; 
LXX—10; LXXXVI—18, 50, 78 


MOUNT AIN-DANCERS. ee V-—73 
MOUNTAIN-PEAKS, ba XVI-~35 
MOUNTAIN-STRONGHOLDS. aes XVI—38 
MOUNTAIN TRIBES. side X—12 
MOUNTAINEERS. abe xXV-—-8 


MOUTH. LVITI--9; LXI—17; LXVIII—54, 86; LXXVII— 
27, 34, 35; LXXXIX—17; XCIII—5; XCV—13, 40, 41 


MOVING OBJECTS. XLVI—5; XLVIII—68 
MRIDU. .» MCVITI—11 
MRIGA. IX—1, 3, 45 XLVII—4; LIII—43, 51-54; 


LXVII—3, 4, 5 
MRIGASIRA. VII-—-2; IX—2, 26; X—5; XI—55; XV—3, 
30; XXIII—6, XXXIT~8; XXXIII—19; LV—31; 
LXXI-—-2; CII—1, 2 


MRIGASIRSHA. ... CI—3; CV—14 
MUD. XLITI-~-36; XLV--7; XLVI—60; XLVIII—16; 
LXXI—10 
MUDDY WATER, a LIV—122 
MUHURTA. ll—-4; XLVIII—59 
MUKHYA, os LIII—45 
MUKTASURYA. ... LXXXVI—12 
MULES. XVI—-20; LXXXVI—66 
MUNGOOSE. XCVII—12 See also Mongoose 
MUNIJA, ie XIV—31 
MUNJA GRASS. Sess LIV—103 | 
MURDER. XXIV—34; LXXXVI—60;, XCVINI—7 
MURDERER, we LXVIL—79 


Y 


a. 8, 20, 


13 , mex 


MURDEROUS MEN. i XVI~1 
MURDEROUS PERSONS. XV—23; LXVIH—74 
MURDHAVASIKTAS. sa LITI—15 
MUSCULAR. .” - 4 LXIX—14 
MUSHA BULBS. | seis LIV—121 
MUSHROOMS. i LIV—100 
MUSIC. XXXINI—23; CI—12 
MUSICAL INSTRUMENTS. XLIV—7; XLVI—61, 62 
MUSICIANS, V—39, 745 X—3; XV—3, 9; XIX—10; 
| LXXXVII—33; XCV—21 

MUSK. - LXXVII—12, 16, 27 
MUSK-RAT., . LXXXVI—20 
MUSTA. .. LXXVII—11 
MUST.A SEEDS. ..LXXVII—9, 10 
MUSTARD. XXIX—5; XLI~5 
MUSTARD SEEDS. XLIV—5; XLVI—24; XLVIIT—35; 

LXXXVII—4 
MUSTACHES. ..  LXVIM—57 
MUSTY. ..  XXVII—5 
MUTINY. XXXIV—20; XXXVII~7 
MUTTRA. .. ,XVI-17, 21 
MUTUAL STRIFE AMONG KINGS. _ ... V—49 
MUZZLE. a LXII—1 
MYROBALAN. LIV~121; LXXVI—6; LXXVII—3 
N 

NABHASA YOGAS, m 1I—(14) 
NADEE. ee. 4 lI-{4) 
NAGA. IX—1, 2, 4,9; XIMI—8; LIV—111; C—2, 5 
NAGA DANTI, wo °-«-LIV-=48 
‘NAGA FRUIT) 2. es ‘LVII—5 


NAGA KESARA, © XXIX~12,; LIV—~101; LXXVII—5,_ 32 
NAGA PUSHPA, XLIV—10; TXXVII—13 


NAGA VEETHEE. 
NAGNAJIT. 


NAGNAPARNA SABARAS. 


NAGNA STRI 


“153 


- XLVII~—4,. 17 
-- LVILI—4, 15 
XIV--10 
LXXXVI—30 


NAILS. LI-—8;, LIITI~—58, 59, LVITI-—20; LXIi—2; LXIII 


—1; LXVII-—~7, 9; 


NAIMISHA COUNTRY. 
NAKED. 

NAKED FAKIR. 
NAKED MONKS. 
NAKED PERSONS. 
NAKHA. 

NAKHL. 
NAKSHATRAS. 
NAKSIIATRAMALA. 


NAKSHATRAPURUSHA. 


NAKTAMALE. 
NALA, 

NALIKA. 
NALIKERA, 

NAME OF QUERIST. 
NANDA. 
NANDANA. 
NANDEE. 
NANDIN, 
NANDIKAVARTA. 
‘NANDIVARDHANA. 
NANDYAVARTA. 
NAPE, 
NAPTRIKA. - 
NARADA. 
‘NARASIMHAVANA. 
‘NARAYANA, __ 
-NARBADA, __ 
‘NAREE MUKHAS. 
NASHTARAIYA, 


LXVIII—41, 87, 101; LXIX—20, 
24, LXX—1; LXXVIII—26 


; XI—60 
LVITI~-45;  LX—19 
LI—2l 

. LXXXVII—34 

o: LI—5 
LXXVII—8, 9, 11, 13, 16 
LXXVII—6 
XCVIII~—7, 9, 10, 11 
LXXXI—34 

CV—1-5, 6, 8, 9-13 
LV—11 

L1V—100 

LIV—100; LXXVII—5 
XIV—9 

XCVI—-14 

XCIX—2 

VIMI—38; LVI—17 
XLITI~—39 

LVI—24 

XXIX—8 

LVI—17 

LIl—32, 36 


2° LI-9; LXvut—ae 


ie LXXXVI—49 
XI-5; XXIV—2 
tae XIV—22 
XLIV—1; XLVIII—77 
ace XVI—1, 9 


156 nips 
NASIK. 


ou 6 RIV—TS 
NATURE... _- $LXVIIT—108, 110 
NAVAMALIKA CREEPER. = LIV—48 
NAVAMSA. = oTTE(14) 


NAVEL, VITI—19;' LI-—9; LII—6; LVIIN—16, 23, 24; 
LXVI—2, 4; LXVII—7; LXVITI—21, 85; LXX—4, 


24,5 LXXVITI—3 
NAVIGATORS. see xXV—18 


NECK  LI—9, 30; LII—3, 4 LVIII—5, 15, 16; LXI—9; 
LXIII—2; LXIV—2, 3; LXV—6; LXVI—!; LXVII~3, 
8; LXVIII—31,.86; LXIX—27; LXX—5, 18, 25; XCTII—3 


NECKLACE. XLIUI—46; LVII—47 
NECTAR. See Vv—1 
NEEM. be LVII-~5 
NEEM FRUIT. ..  LXXXI—6 
NEEM TREE. XXIX—12; LII—118; LIv—115 
NEEPA. XIV—2; LIV—119; LXXXV—6 
NEIGHING. ww» XCIUI—7, 12 
NEPAL. sae V—65 
NEPALESE, us 1V—22 
NEST. .» XCV—2, 3, 5 
NETS. LI—14; LXXXVI—46 
NEUTER LIMBS. oe LI—10 
NEW CLOTHS. es LXXI—8 
NEW HOUSE. AG LIII—125 
NEW MOON. i XLI——1 
NICHULA TREES. XXIX—12; XLVIII—12; LVI-—5 
NIGARA. »  LXXXI~17 
NIGGARDS. is Xv—23 


NIGHT. XXVIII—12, 17, 23; XXXII—7; XXXV—7, 8} 
XXXVIII—5; XLIII—16; XLVI—21,; XLVIII--22, 59; 
LI-—6; LXXXVI-—18, 23; Berna XCIII—4; XCV--9 


NIGHT-BIRDS.. ws RVI-66 
NIMBA. : we LIV 
NIPPLES, ae) LXVIH~27 
NIRGUNDI TREES. as LAV 


Oe oe 
MIRODHA. bali ae 


rethex 1 
NIRRITI. XXXIV—2 LIV—3; LXXXVI—75; XCVIII—5 


NIRVINDHYA. sa XVI~9 
NISHADARASHTRA, a XIV—10 
NISHEKA, i 1I—(14)} 
NISHKUTA. LXXIX~—32, 33, 36 
NISHPAVAS. as XVI—34 
NIT. re LVIlI—2 
NIVESA., XLIM—47 
NOBLES. - V—42 
NOBILITY. - XV—~—16 
NOCTURNAL CREATURES. 6 LXXXVIII—2 
NOCTURNAL OMENS. .. LXXXVI—6 
NOCTURNAL RECREATIONS. we LXXVUI—11 
NODES. a V—16 
NON-LUMINARIES. XX—1; XXXIV—18 
NON-LUMINOUS PLANETS. as LXIX—~1 
NOON, .. XXXIV—8 
NOOSE. LVIII—57; LXIX~34; LXXIX—~—25 
NORTHERN COUNTRIES. acs XLVII—9 
NORTHERN COURSE. i VIII—15 
NORTHERN ROUTE. - IX—8 
NORTHERN SOLSTICE. a LX~—-20 
NORTHERNERS. XVI~21; XVII—15 


NOSE. LI-8; LII—3; LVII—5, 10, 46; LXVI-—-2, LXVIII 
60, 88; LXIX~15, 24; LXX-—-7; XCIII~—+4 


NOSTRIL. ove LI—-39 
NRIPASUTA. we LXXXVITI-5S 
NULLIFICATION. se CIV—53 
NURSE. LI-—-37; LXXVIIH-—9 
NUTS. vee XLIV—5 
NUTMEG. XVI-—30; LXXVII--27 


NYMPHS. XLII—52; XUVITI-25, 32, 58 


0 
OBJECTS. ove LXXV—3 
OBLATIONS. XLVI—81; XLVIII—32; LIV—124 
OBLONG-LIKE. wv. LXXX—16 
OBSTACLES. XLIX—-7; LXXXIX—1; XCV—25 
OBSTRUCTION. ats XCV—41 


OCEAN. V—42; XII—13; XVI—6; XXVIII-—-22; XLIII— 
34, XLVI—87; XLVIII-—61; LXXIV—3 


OCTOGENERIAN. sae LXXVI~3 
ODD NUMBER. 6 LXXII-6 
ODOUR. wae LIV—122 
OFFICER. LITI—9; XCV—20 
OFFICER OF KING. » LXXXVII—1 
OFFSPRING. ALVII—86; LXXIV—4 
OIL. A drop of—poured on the surface of water, V—17 
—will become dear when ve V—60 
—will rise in price. sae VII—4 
—~is assigned to Purvaphalguni. see XV—9 
A halo shining like— ive XXXIV—4 
Meena presides over various——s, i XLI—8 


One should store up—s when the Sun is in Karkataka. XLII-—5 
If—flows from trees there will be threat of famine. \ LVI--27 
When sesamum seeds yield only half the 


quantity of— jay XLVI—-35 
If rivers carry— sat XLVI—48 
Appearance of—in Chaitra and Vaisakha. ... XLVI—&5 

If the crow caws looking at the S. W. that is 
tranquil, one will get— oie XCV—22 
OIL BATH. we SMLVIII—30 
OIL MONGERS. X—~—5, 9; XVI—32 
‘OIL SEEDS. ve XVI~—20 
OINTMENT. aes XLIV-~27 
OLD MEN. ; V—41; XVI—33 
OM, ov XXXVITI~-32 


OMEN. = Il-—(18); { XXXII—27; XLIM—12, 37; LIX—1, 


P v isd? 


LXXXVI—1-80; LXXXVIl-rl, 2, 18; XCV—49, 60, 61; 
XCVI—1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 10° 


OMEN GATES, | LXXXVI~—51, 52, 53 
OMINOUS WORDS. ‘ee LI—28 
ONE-EYED MEN. vs XIV—23 
ONE-FOOTED MEN. asa XIV—31 
OPAL. ke LXXX—5 
OPEN-MOUTHED. __ w. LXVIMI—111 
OPHTHALMIC PHYSICIANS. 536 XV—12 
OPINIONS OF SAGES. se IX—7 
OPPRESSION. oo»  DLUXXIX—24 
OPULENT. LXVIII—10; 15, 71; CI—9 
OPULENT MEN. Sus VHHI~—10 
ORBS. XLVI—86; XLVII—26 
ORGASM. " coe LXVIII—16 
ORIGIN. ose I.—6 
ORISSA, vis XIV—6 


ORNAMENT, XVI~28; XLIII—7, 41, 42, 43, 44, 45, 46, 

47, 48, 49; XLVIII~33, 74; LI—19; LII—3, 5; LVIII 

29; LX—14, LXVII~112; LXXVII—1; LXXVIII—3; 
LXXXVII—8,; XCVITI—10; CI—1 


ORNAMENTATION. ..  XCVIHI—9 
ORNAMENTING. Ses XV—-12 
ORPIMENT. XLIV—9; XLVIII—35; LIV—-110; LXXXI~—7 
OSPREYS, XLVIII—9; LXXXVI—22 
OUTBREAK OF FIRE, ies XXIX—13 
OUT CASTES. sas XV—30 
OUT FITTERS, _ XVI—18 
OUTLET. Se LIV—~120 
OUTSIDERS, as LI—25 
OWL. XLITI~62; XLVI—-68; LXX—~—-22; LXXI—12; 
LXXIX—24; LXXXVI—21, 49; LXXXVIII—36 
OWNERS. ww. LXXXVI—34 
OWNERS OF COWS. Bs V—36 
Ox. oe XLVI—56, 63 


OYSTERS, ~ "  LXXXI1 


SEED pI e a iw 


P 
PADDY. VHI—-30; XIX—6 
PADDY FIELDS. ee V—329 
PADMA. XIV—5; LVI—17 
PADMAKA. ... LXXIX—2, 13 
PADMAKETU, - XI—49 
PADMANABHA. bas CV—15 
PADMARAGA. we) LXXXII—1 
PAHLAVAS. XVI—38; XVIII—6 
PAINTERS. X—10; XVI—18; XIX—10; LXXXVII—15, 39 
PAINTING. ds XV—12 
PAITAMABA, ve l—4¢ 
PAKSHA, vs 1I—¢ 
PAKSHAGHNA, s LIli—38 
PALAS, XXII—2; LXXXI~13 
PALASA. XLIV—12; LIV—17, 59, 83, 96, 112 
PALACES. ww. LEXXIX-6 
PALANQUIN. a.  LXVII—45 
PALATE. LI—9; LXI—6, 10; LXVI—1; LXVII—6, 9 
LXVIII—53, 87 
PALE, i” XIN—7 
PALIVATA. - LV—4 
PALLAVAS. V—38; XIV—17 
PALMS, LXVIII~39, 43, 44; LXIX—22, 29; LXX—7, 11, 12 
PALM LEAVES, - Li—i4+ 
PALM TREES, XXVII—3; LIV—40 
PAMALA. we) XXIV—19 
PANCHALA COUNTRY. - v—3$ 
PANCHALAS, IV—~22; V—38, 41; IX—29, 34; K—4, 135 
XIV—3, 32 

PANCHANADAS, - XI—60 
PANCHA SIDDHANTIKA. I-10; V—18; XVII—-1; XXIV—$ 
PANDU, ie XIV 

PANDYA, ee XI 


PANDYA KING. ses Ty 


‘"woex . ‘8 


PANDYA VATAKA. .. LXXXI—2, 6 
PANIC. : V—51; VI—4; XXXIV—8 
PAPS. LI—31; LVIII—24; LXVIIT~—85 
PAPAKHYA. . adi VU—8, 12 
PAPAYAKSHMA. vee LIVI—45 
PARA. or XVI—10 
PARABHAVA., se VIII— 41 
PARALOKA. wai LXXXI—Z 
PARAPHERNALIA. -_ Ii—-18 


PARASARA. VII-—8; XI—1, 5 XXI—2; XXIII-—4; XXIV— 
2; XLVIII—66; LXI—1 


PARASAVAS, XIV~—18; LIl—~—15 
PARATAS. X—5, 7; XIII-—9; XIV—21; XVI—4, 13, 22 
PARENTS. V—72; LXVII1—79 
PARIAHS. es LIII—12 
PARIDHAVI. 286 VIII—45 
PARIDHI. .. XLVII—19 
PARIGHA. ww. LXXXVI—51 
PARIJATA. an XXVII—9 
PARIYATRA FLOWER. .. LXXVII-—27 
PARIYATRA MOUNTAIN. V—68; XIV—4 
PARIYATRA REGIONS. we VI-10; X—15 
PARIVATSARA. ee VIII—-24 
PARIVESHA. ‘I-34; V—94; XXXIV—See Halo 
PARJANYA. LIlI—43, 49, 52, 56, 72 
PARKS, 3 XVI—29 


PARROTS. XI—11; XXVIII—11, 14; XLVIII—6; LXVIII 
—60; LXXXIII—1 


PARSWASAYEE. IV—-13 
PARTIAL. ..  XLVII—24 
PARTHIVA. se VIII—36 
PARTICLE. iss LVIII—2 
PARUSHAKA. ~~ LIV—50 
. PARVAN. . a V—23 
‘PARVATEE. * IV—30;, LVITI~43 
-PARVATEEYAS. XVH—-16, 23; XVIH--2 
“‘PASPALUM. - Hote ay KL 


B.S, 21. 


462 QR, 


.PASSION. | vee SO LXIX8 
PASTES, LV—8; LXXVII~+2 
PASUPATI. ag LX—~19 
-PATA, we = XLVIII~39 
PATALA, sd XXIX—7 
PATOLAS. is XIV-—30 
PATRA. XVI—30; LXXVII—5, 7, 12, 32 
PAULISA. ons TI—(4) 
PAUNDRAS. V-—-80; XIV~—7; LXXX-~—7 
PAURAVAAS. XIV—27, 31; XVI—22; XXXII—19 
PAURA. a. XVII—6, 8 
PAUSHA. ou VIlI—-5 
PAYASA XLIV—11; XLVI—65 
PAYOSHNEE, 7” XVI—10 


PEACE. IV—19; V-—-87, 97; VI--13; XI--43, 46, 50; XXX 
—15; XXXVIII-—3; XLVII—4, 9; LVIII—33; XCV--46 
PEACE-LOVING PERSONS. ove XV~—21 
PEACOCKS. XXIV—19; XXVIII—14; XXXIV—4; XLVIIT 
—6; LVIN—41; LXVITI~-115; LXXXVI—20, 38; 


LXXXVII—6 
FEACOCK’S COLOUR. uae XLVLi~—2 
PEACOCK’S FEATHERS. a LXXILN—5 
PEALS. .. LXXXVI-59 


PEARLS, VII-6; XIV—-14; XV-—25; XVI-—-7; XXI--23; 
XXIX—6, 9; XLI-—8; XLII—6, 10; XLIV~27; 
LIV—110; LVIJI-—47; LXXII-~-2; LXXX-—5; 

LXXXI—Whole Chapter 


PECHIKA. » LXXXVILI—4 
PEDESTAL. LVILI—3; LX—~17 
PEELU TREE. XXIX—11; -LIV—63, 65, 75 
PEEPUL TREE LIII—-85: LXXXV—4 
PEGS. .  LII—58, 59 
PELICAN. a LXXI-~-12 
PELVIS. su / LYI—6 

' PENANCE, ses KV—24 
PENDENT. “ ... LXVIIT-9, 59 


‘PENIS. Lil--6; LYIN—16; LXVII-~3; LXVIII-7;. XCHI--2 


os 163, 


PENNILESS,  _ LXVIII—4, 10, 18, 20, 29, 31, 33,40, 82 
PENSIVE MOOD. wee = XCHE-S 
PENURIOUS. LXVILI—5, 27, 28; CIII—1, 6 
PENURY. : LXX—18 


PEOPLE. XVI—41; XXXVII-—-3; XLVI-—12; LXIX—40; 
XCV—9; XCVII—10 


PEPPER. LI—15; LXXVII—31 
PERCH. ; » XCV—33, 36 
PERFIDIOUS. = ans CI—3 
PERFORATED. w.  LXXX—15 
PERFUMERS. es XIX—12 
PERFUMERY, es XV—-12 


PERFUMES. XV—25; XLII—5; XLVIII—27, 31, 35, 42; 
LXXVII-~1, 4, 17-24, 27-30; XCIII—8 
PERIL. XXIV—34; XXVIII-—21; XLVI—41; XLVII—22; . 
LXXXVI—57; LXXXIX~—-20; XCI-—2 
PERSIA. we UXXXI—2, 5 
PERSPIRING. .. LXVIU—33 
PESTILENCE. V-—-27; XI—12, 30; XII--22; XXXII—25; 
XXXV—4; XLVI-—-80; LXXIX~—24, LXXXVII—33 


PETALS. LXVIII—64; LXX~7 
PHALGULUKAS. os XIV ~23 
PHALGUNA, V—73; VIII-~-7; XXI—l1, 21, 30; XXV—6 
PHANIKARAS. oe XIV—12 
PHANIN. ome C—2 
PHENAGIRI. ” XIV—18 
PHE PHE. bas XC—13 
PHENOMENA. II—18; IJI—10; (Five) XXII-- 
PHENTA., LXXXVIII-—-26, 31 
PHILOLOGISTS. sak XVI—24 
PHILONTHROPISTS. ve) LXVINI--39 
PHLEGM. LI-~-27, 33;° LXXVII—35 
PHLEGMATIC AFFECTIONS. ww. XXXII~10 
PHLEGMATIC CONSTITUTION. .  .. LXXVIII—17 
PHLEGMATIC DISEASES. VIII-~-28; XXXII—10' 
PHYSICAL GROWTH. re LXIX—§ 


PHYSICIANS, V—80; VII-~6; IX—32, 43; X—3, % 16, 175 


16%: neil 
Ry, 19,.96. XVE—S: LIM—fo, XXXlI—tf1 


PIERCE. ae « KLVI~-77 
PIGEON. XXVIII~-11; XLVI—68; LIV—108;' LXXI—12 
PIKKA. we =) LXXXI—17 
PILGRIMAGE. a LXIX—19 
PILLAR. XLVI—74; LIII—27, 28, 29, 58, 74; XCVIN—6 
PIMPLES, LIl--1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 10 
PINAKA, es LVITI—43 
PINDARA. a LIV~—50 
PINGALA. VINI-—48; LXXXVI—49; LXXXVIII—40 
PINGALIKA. ww. LXXXVIII—4 
PIOUS. a +) XVI-23 
PIPPALA TREE. sac LIV—96 
PIPPALEE. ..  LXXVI—-l 
PIPPIKA. .. LXXXVI-—38 
PIP PILI. an XVI—30 
PIRILI. LXXXVI—20, 44 
PISACHAS. .. XLVIN—-30 
PISIKAS. - XIV—14 
PITA. ot LUI—54 
PITCHERS. LVI—15; LXVIII—46 
PITRU. wae LALI——44, 63, 73 
PITS. ..  XLVIW—16 
PLACE. XLV—16; LXXXVI—77 
PLAKSHA. LI~17; LIV—119; LX—8 


PLANET. XVI-~-39; XVII—1, 11; XVIII-—7, 8} XIX-—~22; 
XX—3, 4; XXI~—17; XXVI—11; XXVIII-—-21; XXXII 
—17; XXXIV~16; XLII—-13; XLIV—14; XLVI—~4; 
XLVII—6, 7; XLVIII—26, 29; CIV-—~-2, 47, 57, 58, 60 


PLANETARY ASPECTS, : Clv—48 
PLANETARY COMBINATION. - XX—5 
PLANETARY INFLUENCE. XXI—35;  LIII—89 
PLANETARY WAR. II—10; V—95; XXI—-25; XLVIII—83 
PLANT. . XXX—19 XLVI—26 
PLANTAINS. XXIX—7; XLI—4; LV—4 
PLANTAIN TREES. XLIi—57;, LXXXII—1 


PLANTING. : SPEDE, 9) baa) 5 


Vs id 


IEDRE:; 1655 


PEAVA! .. we WITI39-- 
PLAVANGA. ae VI—43 
PLEASURES, .. XV—19; LXVITI~-18, 29, 30, 53, 60, 67; 
: LXXIV—4+ _ 
PLEASURE GARDEN. XLIN—13; LVI—8 
PLEASURE HOUSE, .. LII—14, 16 
PLEASURE LAKE. | | we LXIV-3 
PLENTY. VINI—15; XLVII—4 


PLOUGH, IV—9, 10; XXXIII—9 XLVI—63; LVIII—36; 
LXIX—16; LXX—2; LXXXVI~46 

POETS. V—39; X—3, 17; XVI—19; XIX—12; XXXII—11 | 

POISON. XV—7; XVI—4; LI-—-29; LXXX—18; LXxxIr . 
—€& LXXXVII—-37, 44; C—-4 


‘POISONING. «»  _XCVITI—8. 
POISONOUS TREE. ws LXXXIX—1 
POLE STAR. XIH—2 XLVII—12 
POLICE MFN. +s XVI—20 | 
POLITICIANS. X—17; XVI--24. 
POMEGRANATE, LV—4, 10; LXXXV—7. 
POMEGRANATE SEED. .»  LXXXI—8 
POND. XII—10; LIV—118 


POOR. LXVIII—7, 10, 17, 22, 30, 34, 35, 37, 40, 43, 52, 55, 


POOR MEN. 2 XVI~33 
POPULARITY, LXXXV—3 
POPULATION. XLVI—30; XCIV—9 
PORCUPINE. LXXXVI—23, 44 
PORE. .» LXVII—5, 81 
PORRIDGE. XCV—~23 


PORTENT. XLVI—1, 2, 3, 15, 17, 24, 30, 36, 37, 58, 63, 
82, 83, 84, 86, 88, 90, 96 XLVIII—70; XCVvII—17 


PORTENTOUS THUNDER. w  ~—-XCVIENG 
POST HERDS. sea Li-~-4 


POTS. XXIV-~-27; XLIIE—35; XLIV—~20, XLVIN—37, $1; 
LATI-~29;:- . LXIX—2¢; LXXIX—23; LXXXIX—1; | ‘XCV-~44- 
POT BELLY. |. LVLI—S7. LXXVIU-—1g° . 


iat 
<7 

my ‘g ft 

k 14 4 


POT LIKE, LXIV—1; LXVHI—~80 
POT LIKE BELLY. oe) LXX=17' 
POTAKI. | : we LXXXVITI—5 
POTENTATES. — XVII—12 
POTIONS. | | XVI--18; LXXV—S5 ° 
POTTERS. V—33; X—9, 12; XV—1l; XVI—29 
POVERTY. LXVIII—3, 11, 38, 51, 68; CIII—2, 4, 12 
POWER. XLII—11; LXXI—11 
POWERFUL. - LXIX~~-32 
PRABHATA. ee XVI--32 
PRABHAVA, w» — VIII—27, 23 
PRADHANA. ve I—7 
PRADYUMNA. ee LVIII—40 
PRAJAPATI. VIlI—24; XLVIII—68 
PRAK JYOTISHA. XIV—6; XVI—1 
PRAKRITA, .. VII~8, 9, 14 
PRAKRITI. wn ‘II—S 
PRALEENAKA. ae LITI—28 
PRAMADA.  LXXXVI—31 
PRAMADI, Gee VIII -45 
PRAMATHI. = VIlI—3¢ 
PRAMODA. - VILI—29 
PRANA. - 11~(4) 
PRANAYAMAS, me XCV—62 
PRAPTASURYA, » LXXXVI—12 
PRASA. : are XX-—~-2 
PRASASTHA MOUNT. a XIV—20 
PRASTTHALA. - XVI~26 
‘PRATTLING. vw. LXVIM~113 
PRAYAG. . | aes XI—-35 
PRAYER. : es LIX—10 


PRECEPTOR, XXXIV—17; XLIII—63; XLV-~15; XLVIIL 
—3, 48, 50, 73; LIMI—10; LXVIII—35, 71; XCIV-9 
PRECIOUS STONES. II—(18); LX—4; LXXX—~—2, LXXXII~—3 
PREDECEASING. | oa CIli—8 
PREGNANCY OF CLOUDS. ae RRI6-18. 
PREGNANT, we TB 


TNDEE + 167 


PREGNANT WOMEN., we XVEE1 


PRESERVATION. 


se XC—15 
PREVIOUS BIRTH. w» ~LXVIII—103 
PREY, LXX—-22 


PRICES. VI~—10; VII—1, 4; XVII~25; XXIV—33; XL—11; 
XLU—14, L—6; LXXXI—9-12, 18+19; LYXXI—7-11 
PRIDE, XV—21; XVI—39; LXXV—6 
PRIESTS, X—5, 13, 16; XV—1; XLIV—14, 19, 20, 21, 22; 
XLVI~—15, 59, 73; XLVII—18, 54, 77, 78, 80; LX—11, 

12, 19; LXXXVII~38 


PRINCE. SXX19; LXXXVI—34; LXXKVII—4, 31 
PRINCE ROYAL. LXXIX—9; XCI¥---9 
‘PRINCIPAL DOOR, es LIII—80 
PRINCIPALITIES. vai XLVI~11 
PRISON. LI—5; XCVIII~-14 
PRISONERS. XVI—33; XLVITI—81 
PRITHWIDHARA. oe LII-~47 
PRIVACY. sa LXXVI--2 
PRIVATE PARTS. ae L-—9 
PRIYAKA, ies XLIWI—15 ° 
PRIYANGU, XXIX—4; XXNXIV—12; XLIV~—9; LV—3; 
L&XVII—-8; LXXXV—7 
PROCLAIMERS. ssa x—6 
PROFITS. XLIT—13; LI-23 
PROMINENCE. ..  LXXXV—4 
PROPERTIES. die AIX— 19 
PROPIATORY CEREMONIES FOR THE PLANETS. 
XLIVI—37 
PROPITIATORY HYMNS. see XLIV—20 


PROSPERITY. IV—6, 31; V—50, 53, 70, 87, 97; VI~3, 4, 
13; IX—8, 20: XVIII—1; XIX—15; XXIII—10; XXIV— 
21, 29; XXX—10, 15, 29; XXXII—26; XXXIH—10; 
XXXIV—14; XXXVIJI—5; XLIII—1l; XLIV~-5, 21; 
XLVII—11; XLVIII—21; XLIX—4, 6, 8; L—19, 
21; LX—4; LXI-17; LXII—1; LXII—1; LXIV 
—2; LXX—3; LXXIX~12; LXXXV—3; XC 

—32; XCIV—-7; 10: XCV—2; CIlI-~11 


PROSPEROUS. | 
PROSTITUTE. 
PROTECTION. 


PROTEGE. 
PROUD. 
PROUD MEN. 
PROVISIONS. 
PROWESS. 
PUD. 
PULAHA. 
PULASTHYA. 
PULINDA. 
PULSES. 


iba 168- 
LIN—116; LXVIII—70: LXIX—~s2 
.. =St(‘é«dWSXX~—“"NG |. 

LXVILI—116 

XLIX--3, 5. 

CI—10, 12 

XVII—25: 

V—80, 83 

XV—15; XVI—38 

XCV—~—55 

1I—(18); XIII—6, 11; XLVIINI—63 
II—{18); XIII—5, 11; XLVIII—63 
IV—22; V—77; IX~—17; XVI~2 
VIII—8 


PUNARVASU. VII-—10; IX—2, 27; X—6; XI—55, XV—S 
29: XXII—-7; XXXII-—-8; XXXIII—18; LXXI—2; 


PUNDRAS. 
PUNGENT. 


PUNGENT THINGS. 
PUNISHMENT. 


PUNJAB. 
PUNNAGA, 


‘PUNNAGA FLOWERS. 


PUNYAHA. 


C1—4; CTi-—-2 


V—70; IX—15; X-—14; XI-—-27, 58; XVI-—-3 


LI—32; LIV—122; LXXVI—12 
XVI-—4, 34 

LITI—41 

we 6; KXIV—21 

XXVII-—-9; LITI-—87; LV—3 

. LXXXVIT—24 

LX~—10 


PUNYAHA HYMNS. XLITI-—26; KLIV—7, ‘15; XLVITI—49. 


PUPIL. 
PURA. 

PURE. 
PURIKAS. 
PURITY. 
PURNA 
PURNAHOTI. 


PURNA KOSA. 


PURNAKUTA. 


.PURUSHADAS. 


LVINI—11 

XX—2; XCV—56 

XV—5, 10; XVI~23; CI—2 
om XIV—10 

XV—18; LXXIV—9 

i XCIX—~2 

. _ XLUI—32 
XLIV—10; XLVIII—40 

a. LXXXVHI—4 

IV—22 


‘PURVABHADRA. VII—I1; IX—2, 34; X—17; X¥-—23, 28; 
XXI—28; - XXMI--9, XXXU—19;- a LXx! 


INDEX 169 


PURVAPHALGUNI. ViI—~7, 10; IX—2, 6, 29; X—1, 8; XL 
—56; XV—9, 28; XXIII—7; XXXII~12; xXXIJI— 
18; LXXI—3; CI—6; CII—-3 __ 
PURVASHADHA, l—(18); VIT-—7, 11; VIII—#; Ix—3, 6, 
33; X—14; XI—59; KV—~18, 28; XXI—6, 28: XXIIT 
1, 6 XXVI~14; XXXIT~21; XX‘NIIT—19: 

LXXI—5; CI—11; CIl--5 


PUSHAN, LItI—44; XCVIII—5 
PUSHKALAVATAS. — - AIV—26; XVI—26 
PUSHIKARA, V—68; XI—35: XVI 31 


PUSHYA, VI--7; VII—10; DUX—2, 27; X--6; XJ--55; XV 
—6, 28; XXI-—9, 19, 30; XXIII—9; XXX/I[—12: 
XXXTI—18; XLVII—5, XLVITI—3, 45, 50, 73: 

LIV—123; LV—31; LXXI—2; LXXXIf—20; 

C—6; CI—5; Cli--2 


PUSHYA MONTH. - V—-71 
PUSHYA SNANA. JI—(18); XLVIJI—2, 3 
PUTANA. “a LIl1—83 
Q 
QUADRUPEDS. V—30; XVI~5; XXI—17; XLVI—55, 
56, 58, 71; LI~—16 
QUAKING. see ACVII —6 


QUARREL, V—21l; XLVI—79; L—17; LIII--41; LXIx— 
36; LXNX--23; LAXIX—-5; LXNXXVI—60, 63; LXN XVII 
30, 35; LNXXNIX—11; ACV—19, 37, 38, 51; XCVI1—6 
QUARRELSOME, . CIl—9; CLIT —-6 
QUARTERS. AXVI-8; XXNI-—-I; XXXII—1; XXXVII[— 
1, 2; XLUI—34, 58; XLV—16; XLVI—10, 93; XLVI 
—20, 26, 69; LITI—117, 119; LIV-—3-5; LXXXVI— 

34, 35, 68, 71, 75, 77, 78, 79, 80; XCVII—4, 13; 
QUEEN. XXXIV—14, 21; XLIII--63; XLIX—2, 5; LUI 

6; LXX—10; LXXITI-—-4 
QUERIST. XXVIII—2; L—11; LI—6, 7, 11, 12, 14, 15, 

17, 20, 23; LXXXVI—80 

B, &, 22, 


i70 | INDEX 
QUERY. 1I—(14; XXVIII—1; LI~1, 2, 6 LItI—39; 


| XCVI—14 

QUESTIONER. 43 LI—1, 25 

QUICK SILVER. es XVI~25 

QUINT ESSENCE. ww. =~ LXXIV—17 

QUIVERING OF THE BODY. ba II—(15) 
R 

RADIANT. ‘hd XVII—11 


RAHU. IV—28; V—1, 3, 7, 16, 69, 72; XI—22; XVI—35- 
37; XX—6; XXXIV—15; XCVII-—-2; CHI—1, 2, 4, 


5, 6, 8, 9 10, 11, 12 
RAIMENT. LXXVII—1 


eee 


RAIN. II—(18); III—16, 22, 24, 27, 37; IV—11, 16; V—55, 
70, 74, 86; VI—10, 11; VII—2, 14; VIII—6, 7, 8, 14, 
25, 32, 36, 40, 44, 48, 49, 50; IX—26-29, 30-32, 34, 3+-39, 

43, 445 X—2; XVII—4, 21; XIX—2, 21; XXI-—3, 4, 

22, 26, 28, 31, 33-35, 37; XXII—2, 4-8; XXIII—1, 
3, 4, 5, 6-10; XXIV—19, 21, 22, 26, 29, 35;* XXV 

—3; XXVI-—-7, 13, 14; XXVII—6, 8; XXVIII-—1-9, 

11-13, 15-21, 23, 24; XNIX—11, 14; XXX—4, &, 11, 

13-14, 18, 20, 24, 26; XXXII—16-19, 20-22, 26; 
XXXIV—6, 7, 11, 12-15; XXXV-—3, 6; XXXVII 
—3; XLII—1; XLVI—40-41, 43, 46; XLVII—22, 
23; LXXXII-—6; LXXXVII—36; LXXXIX—6, 7, 

19; XCII~—2; XCV—3-4, 16, 17, 54, 58, 59; XCVI—S5 
RAINBOW. IH—(18); XXIV—17; XXVIII—16; XXX—2, 8, 
31, 33; XXXIII—29 XXXIV—6; XXXV—I1-8; XXXVI 
—3, XLIV~—25; XLVI—4, 45, 88; XLVII-—19, 23; 

LIV-—-94; LXXX-—~14; XCVII—1-3, 6 
RAIN CAVES. awe XXVIII-—~6 
RAIN-FALL. XXI-—-32; XXITI-—-2; XXIV—10; XCV—52 
RAINY SEASON. XXI--2; XXV—5; XXVI—14; XLVI—88~-89 
RAIVATAKAS. XIV-—-19, XVI-—-31 


INDEX "134 
RAISED. : we  LXVIII—~86 
RAJAKOSATAKA., aug LIV-~.121 
RAJAYAKSHMA. ca LII—47 
RAJAYOGAS, ie ” TI-—(14) 
RAKSHASA. ms VIII~45 
RAKSHASEE, LIII—83 
RAKTABOLA, LVLI—6 
RAKTAKSHA, ast VIII—51 
RALA. .. LXXXVIII—6 
RAMA, a LVIII-—30 
RAMATAS. X—5; XIV—21; XVI—21 
RAMBLE, : i CI—9 
RASA, LXXVII—5, 6,10; LXXXII—1 
RASH DEEDS. - LXXV—7 
RASI. II—(14); XLI—1; XLII—~-13 
RASMIKALAPA. LXXXI—32 
RASMI KETU. ae XI—40 
RAT. LIV—20; LXXXVI—65; xXCV—4 
RAT-HOLES. . XLVIII—16 
RATHA. XVI—16 
RAUDRA. VIII—48 
RAUDRA KETU. XI—32 
RAVAKA, LXXXI-—17 
RAYS. ~ XXXV—1 
REALM. XLVI—60 
REBELLION. V—26 
REBIRTH. CV—16 
RECLUSE LXXXVII~—7, 36 
RECOVERY. LXXXVII~—5 
RED ASOKA. XXIX—2 
RED BLOSSOMS. \V—14 
RED EYES. LXV—11 
RED FRUITS AND FLOWERS. XVI—14 
RED LOTUS. XXIX—9; XLVI—87 
RED RICE. XXIX—2 
RED TREE. LXXXVI—80 


REDNESS OF THE SKY. 


oe II—(18) 


¥72 . INDEX 


RE-ECHO, XC--12; XCI—2 
REEDS. aig XCV—5 
REGICIDE. se VITI~18 
RELATION. - LI-: 24 © 
RELATIVES. LXXXVU—19; XC—8 
RELEASE. .. XCVILI—14 
RELIGIOUS DUTIES. ae V—72 
RELIGIOUS MERIT. LVI—1; LXXIX-~12; LXXXVII—21 
RENOWN. LXXIX— 12; LXXXI—30 
RENOWNED. we XS 
RENOWNED MEN. ..  XVI-5, 29 
RENUKA. ..  LXXVIUI+5 
RENUNCIATION, LIUI—2; LXXIV—5 
REPEATED ONE. we LXVIIT—74 
REPROBATES. Ze XVI—37 
REPTILES. TlI—29; VI—3; XI—45; “V—-7 
REPULSION, - a LYS V6 - 
REPUTATION. | ee LVI—1 
RESIN. XLI—2; LXXVII—16, 28 
RESONANCE. bas L—+ 
RESPECT, LII—8; LXXIV—4; LXXXv—4 
RETENTION. 0 XXII+3, 4 
REVANTA. .. LVIN—55, 56 
REV ATI. VII—6, 10; IX—2, 35; X—~—18; NV—25, 2: 


NWAITI~—6; XXXII-—-20; XXXIITI—-19, LV—31, DLN- 21; 
LXXI~-7; C—6; Ci—14;. ClI- 6 


REVERSAL. - XCVII—4 
REVOLUTION, 7 N12 
REWA RIVER. es XU=7 
RHEUMATIC. ve LXXVII—17 
RICE, XV—6; XVI—7; XIX--16; XLI~3; XLIV—5; 
XLVIII—30, 35; LXXXVII—14; XCV—20, 51 
RICE BALL. ..  XLIV—19 
RICE GRAIN. we LXXX—12 
RICE GRUEL, a LI—31 
RICH. XV—S5, 8, 17, 21, 24; LXVIN—39, 42, 45, 115 


RICH MEN. XVI—24, 38; XVII—-16 


INDEX’ 


RICHES. 

RIDER. 

RIG VEDA. 
RIGHT LEG. 
RIGHTEOUS. 
RIGHTEOUS MEN. 
RIGHTEOUSNESS. 
RIKTA. 

RIKTA TITHI. 
RING. 
RING-FINGER. 
RISHABHA, 
RISHEEKAS. 
RISHIPUTRA. 
RISHYAMUKHAS. 
RISK FROM FIRE. 
RIVERS. V—77; X24; X-—-17; 


1, 20; XXVI~—7; XXXII—22; 
XLVIII—8, 15, 62; 
LXXIX—4; LXXX—~—10; LXXXVI— 


87, 89; 
LXIX—20; 


ROADS. 


ROAD JUNCTION. 

ROARING. 

ROBBERS. VIS; 
SV=7, 11,23; 


XXVUI—-5; XLITI— 13; 


VIjI—48, 52; 
AVI-—5; 


173 


se CIHII—11 
XCIN—6 
XLVIIT—31 

soe XCTTT —12 


XV—20; LXIX—14, CI-—-11 


XVI—23; XLV—5 
XVITI-- 4 

XLV—3; XCIX—2 
C—8 
LXIIi-—2 
LVIII-—27 
LXXXVI—1 
X1V-—15 
XLVI--83 
KIV—13 

a V— 57 
XVI—42; XVIT~—15; XIX 
XLV—4, 10; XLVI-—4/7, 
LVI—6, 8; LIX--2; 


XIV—15; 


25, 50; XCV—16 
LI—16; LIII-—74; LIX 
—2; LXXIX—3 

LI—4 

XXXITI-—23 

IX—14, 18, 41; X—5; 
XIX—8, 19; XXAVI-—3; 


XXXVII~—2; XACV—5 


ROCKS. NXXIUI—4; LIV—108, 109, 112, 113, 114, 115 
ROCK SALT. LXXVI~—11 
ROD. XLII—1l; LXXII—4, 6; LXXIX—23 
RODHAKRIT. VIlI-—43 
RODHRA. XVI-—-30 
ROGA. _.LILI—45, 56, 63 
ROGUES. XV—4; XVI—15, 32; LIW—89; LXVIII—22 
ROGUERY. LXIX—20; LXX—7 


"ROGUISH. 


LXVIII-55 


4 
1 
eh 


ROHINI. 


INDIR 
II—{18); VI—9, 10; VII—2, 9; VIII—~-19; Ix—2, 


85; X—4, XI-54; XII-—-22; XV—2, 28; XXI—-28; XXIII 


8; 


XXIV—I-5, 11-12, 28-33, 36; XXV~—1; XXVI— 
10, 11, 12; XXXII—~16; XXXIII—19; XLVII—6, 


| 14, LV—31; LXXI—1; CI—2; Cll—1 
ROHITA. XLVII—20 
ROHITA DEER. LXXXVI—26 
ROHITAKA TREE. LIV—68, 72, 79, 8¢ 
ROMAKA. 1I—(4) 
ROMANS. XVI-6 
ROOF. XLV—8 
ROOM. LXXIV—I 
ROOST. ae XLV—13 
ROOTS. V—77; VIII—19; IX—35; XIII—11; XV—7, 17; 


XLI—6; XLII-—3, 9, 12; XLVIII-—1, 28; LI—40; 


LV-—-7; LVITI—~—58 


ROPES. XLIII—66; LI—14; XCV—40 
ROSARY. LVIII—38 
ROSE APPLE. LXXXII—1 
ROTANG TREE. LIV—6 
ROTATION. Ii—12 
ROUGH AND HARD PEOPLE. V—41 
ROUND. .» LXVILI—55, 65 
ROUND HEAD. LXVIII—79 
ROYAL ABLUTION. XLVIII—4, 54, 83 
ROYAL EQUIPMENTS. XVI—-24 
ROYAL FAMILY. XCIV—10 
ROYAL GEM. LXXX—4 
ROYAL HOUSE. LIlI—4 
ROYAL MANDATE. XCVIII—14 
ROYAL MANSIONS. II—(18) 
ROYAL PRECEPTORS. XXXIV—13; LXXIX—9 
ROYAL PRIEST. XVI—23; XXIX—10; XXXIII—27; 
XXXVI—1; XLIII—30 
ROYAL TREASURY. we) CKAKLV—~19 
RUBBISH. XCV—40 
RUBBISH PLACE. - aw Li-~4 


INDEX ' 173: 


RUBY. »»  LXXXI—1 
RUCHAKA. LII—28, 35, 36; LXIX—2, 7, 27, 28, 37 
RUDDY GEESE. XII—11; LVI—5; LXXXVI—21 
RUDHIRANANA. bss Vi—4 
RUDHIRODGARI. ss VIM—50 
RUDRA. VIII—24; XLVIII-55; LIlI—48; XCVIII—4 
RUDRA JAPA. ee XLVI—31 
RUDRAS. | w  XLVIII—56 
RUDRA GANA. .. XLVII—71 
RUFFIANS. LXXV—7;_ LXXXVII—43 
RUGGED GROUND. a LI—4 
RUIN. XLVI—8, 52, 55, 70; LX—6; LXXIX—36, 39: 
LXXXVI—51, 66; XCV—53; CIII—7 
RULER. XLVII—24; LXXXIX—2; XCV—6 
RUMBLING. XXXII—21; XLVI—88 
RUMP. cS LXVI~1 
RUNNER. as LXI~—12 
RUPASATRA. 2 CV—6 
RURAL CREATURES. 1 LXXXVI~—24 
RURAL OMENS. LXXXVI—38, 48 
RUSTICS. 6 LXXXVII~45 
RUTHLESS. ee IV~11 
RUTTING ELEPHANT. .. LXXIX—7 
S 
SABARAS. IX—15, 29; X~—15, 18; XVI—1, 33 
SACHIN. . LXIX—31, 39 
SACRAMENTS, vw»  XCVITI--16 
SACRED FIRE. XVI~—15; LIU—16; LXVITI—48; 
LXXXVII—3 
SACRED HYMNS. a XV—1 
SACRED SPOT. LIX—2; LXXIX—3 
SACRED THREADS. ww. XLVIII—~33 


‘SACRED: TREES. XLVI--70; LXXXV~—4 


176: INDEX. 
SACRIFICIAL ALTAR. XIX—6; ‘XLIV~8; XCVII—11 


SACRIFICIAL APPURTENANCE. bes LXIX—~24 
SACRIFICIAL FIRE. II—(15;; | XLIJI—34 
SACRIFICIAL PLACES. ous XLIMN—13 
SACRIFICIAL POST. LXX—10; XCVIH—~—11 
SACRIFICIAL RULES. oi XV—1 
SACRIFICIAL TWIGS. - XLIV—12 


SACRIFICE, [I—15; V-~-28, 98; VIII—9; XJII—11; XV—6, 
24 XNVII—15; XIX—6, 13; XLIII—37, 53; XLIV- 14; 
XLV—5; XLVI—24, 46, 58, 72; LVI—-2; LXVII 
—44; LXIX—38; LXXNVI—78, 80; 

XCVIII—14, 16; C—5 


SACRIFICERS. XINI—11; XVI-7; LAVIL-—47 
SADDLE. LXXXIX~1; XCIH—1, 6 
SADHARANA. ie6 VIII—43 
SADHYAS. we XLVILI—-55 
SAFFLOWER. ae X~—11 
SAFFRON. X—1l]l; XXIX—9; XLII—10; L~2l 
SAFFRON PASTE. XLIV—5; XLVIII—33 
SAGES. XLVI—10; XLVIII—20, 25, 31, 60 
SAHA. .. XLVITI—40 
SAHADEVEE. XLIV-—-10; XLVIII—46 
SAHYA. site LXIX—30 
SATLORS. IV—8, VII~-6; IX—31; X-—-10; XVII—17 
SAILEYA. LXXVII—10, 11, 13 
SAINDHAVAS. ae V-—-71 
SAINDHAVA SALT. a XVI—25 
SAIRANDHRAS. shy XIV —29 


SAKAS. V—38; VIJI—20; IX~21; XIII-9; LIV—105; 
LXXIX-—-2, 13, 16 


SAKHA. i” 1-9 
SAKHYAS. - LX—19 
SAKRA. LII—54; LXXXVI—1 
SAKTI. ..-LXIX—34 
SAKUNA. 1 LXXXVI—4 
SAKUNA HYMNS. ..  XLVI—73 


SAKUNL LXXXVI—31; C—2 5 


SAL. . LXXIX—2, 13, 16 
SALA. XLIV—4; LII—87; LIX—6; LXXXYW—7?7 
SALA TREE. XXIX—2 ° 
SALES. be VIII~—6 
SALIVAHANA SAKA. VIIT~20 
SALLAKI SEEDS. LVII—1 
SALT, N-—8; XV--9, 25; XVI—7; XXVIII~—4 XI.I—63 
L-~-2Z2; LI-32; LIV—104+, 122;» LXVIJI—16 
SALIVAS. " -V=--76; XIV—~—2; XVI—21; XVII~13, 18 
SAMA. Ii—(15);} XLVITI—31 
SAMACG AMA. XVII—2; XX—5, 8, 9 
SAMAJA. XX—-45, 7, 9 
SAMATATA. XIV—6 
SAMBA. LVILI—40 
SASL. ALVITH-~--39; LITI--87; LIX—5: LXXNKV—6 
SAMEL TREE, XXIX—11; LIV—81, 83, 85 
SAMIIITA, 1-9; T—(s), 16 
SAMMOHA, X¥X—5, 6, 9 
SAMPURNA. XLV~-2 
SAMRIUDDIIL RIKS. XLVIN—71 
SAMSRAYA, Il-—(15) 
SAMUDGA. ..  LVI—17, 23 
SAMVARTA. XI—51; XX—5, 6, 9 
SAMVARTAKA., XLVIII—66 
SAM\ \VisARA. 1I—(2): VIli—24 
SAMVATSARA PURUSHA. oe VID—i9 
SANAINA, XLV ITT—64 
SAS ANDANA, XLVIIT—64 
SANATANA, XLV ILI—64 
SANAT KUMARA, XLV LUI—64 
SANCTUM SANCTORUM. LVI—12: LX—16 
SANCHLUARDANA, V—81, 87 
SAND, XCV~13 
SANDAL, LXXVII—8; LXXIX—2, 12 
SANDALS. 


SANDAL PASTE, 
SAND DUNES, 


B, * 2% 


ee LXXI-—9 
Te LI—1¢ 


173 INDEX 


SANDAL WOOD. XVI-~—30; XLIV—9; LIX-—-5; LXXIX-- 


12; LXXXVII—11 
SANDY. sec LIV—91 


SANDY BANKS, ..  XLVIII—8 
SANDY PLACE, 526 LI—4 
SANDHI. = 11--(15) 
SANKEERNA. . LXVII—4, 5 
SANKHA, . . . LXXVII—10 
SANKHYATA. _ KIV—2 
SANKRAMANAKALA. a XLII—2 
SANKSHIPTA. .. VII—8, 10, 14 
SANNIPAYA., we =«CXN -5, 8, 9 
SAN {IKAS. er XIV—20 
SAPPHIRE. VII—20; LXXX—4 
SAPTAPARNA. ies XXIX—4 
SAPTAPARNA TREE. ae LIV—29 
SAPTA RISHIS. si L118) 
SARADHANAS. de XIV~—26 
SARAMEYA. we LXXXVILI—9 
SA RASAPARILLA. sa LV—22 
SARASWATAS. XIV--2; XV1—22 
SARASWATI. XIV—2; XLVII!—56 
SARASWATI RIVER. es XVI-31 
SARAYU. V—65; XVI—16 
SARDULAVIKREEDITA, oes CIV—4 
SARIKA, .»» LXXXVIII—30 
SARIVA. - jl. —87 
SARJA. XLIV—4; LIV--105; LIX—6 
SARJA JUICE, we = LXXVIL-11 
SARJA RASA, ..  LVII—3, 6 
SARVADHARI, 6 VIIT—37 
SARVAJIT. 5 VUI—37 
SARVARI, is VIII—39 
SARVATOBHADRA. LIN—31; LVI-~-18, 27 
SARVATOBHADRA SCENTS. wwe )« CU LXXVII—26 
SASA. LXIX—2, 7, 20, 23 


SASHKULI, ; we =, LXXVI~9 


SASTRAKETU, 
SASYAKA, 


SATABHISHAK. 


NORK 179 


a XI—30 
oe LXxXk—5 


ViI—6; IX—3, 34; X—2, 17; XV—22, 


29; XXI--29; XXIII—6; XXXLI-—-20; LIV—123; LXXI 


SATADRU. 
SATAPUSHPA, 
SATAVARI. 
SATISFACTION. 
SATTV.\. 


—6, CI—13; Ci—6 
XVI—21 
LXXVII--8 
XLIV—10; XLVIII—40 
LXXXVII—6; XCV—43 
LXVITi—114 


SATURN. IV—21, 26; V--61, 68; IX—38, 40; X—1-2, 3- 
20; XI-—-18; XV—31; XVI-31-34; XVII—6, 14, 17, 19, 

2+, 29, 27, XVITI-6; XIX—19-21,; XX—-7; NNLI— 

10; XXVITI—19, 21; XXXIV—12; XLVI—11; 
XLVU—13, 14; LXIX—2, 5; XCVII—2; CIll 


SATYA. 
SAUBHANJANA. 
SAUG SNDHIKA. 
DAULIKA, 
SAUMYA. 
SAUNDIKA. 
SAURASHTRA. 


SAURASHTRIANS. 


SAUKA. 
SAURIKEERNAS. 
SAURPARA. 
SAUVEERAS. 
SAVANA. 
SAVASTHAMBA. 
SAVITA. 
SAVITRA., 
SAVYA, 
SAYASRAYA, 
SCAB. 

SCALE PANS. 


LITI—43, 52 

XLIV-—-9 

XXIX—10; LXXX—5 
NIV—8 

VIL—43 

LXAXVI—31 


V--68; IX--19; XIV—19; XVI—17, 31 


AXXII—19 

Ii—{4) 

XIV—11 

wah LXXX-—-6 

IX—19; XIV—17; XVI—21 
W—(5), (7) 

LII—21 

LII—46, 52; XCVIII—4 
LII—48; LX—22 
wide V—-43 
LItI—21 
XXXII—14 

see XXVI—6. 


s30 : INDEX 


SCHOLARS. XIII—10; XVI—29; XVIII-—4; XLVITI—80; 


LXVIII—5, 45 
SCINDHIANS. esi XVIII—6 


SCIENCES. ” LXIX—14 
SCORCHED. = LI-3 
SCORPION. ° ..LIV~26; L--3 
SCRATCHES. LXXX~—15; LXXXKIX—9; XCV—3] 
SCROTUM. nee LY VI—2 
SCULPTOR, LVIII—50; LXXXVII—32 
SCYTHIANS. XVI—6:; XVII~26; XVIII—6 
SEAS, ae v—42 
SEA SIIORES. ..  XLVIN—12 
SE\SON UI—24; XXVI—14; XXX—22; XXXVII—8; 
XLVI~26, 29, 39, 83, 96; XCVII~4 
SEATS. II~(18), LXX—10; LXXI—-9; LXXIX~--38-39; 
LXXXIX—1 
SECOND ALTAR. w=) CU XLVEI—75 
SECOND MOON. | OUXXVII— 
SECONDS. ..  XLVITI—56 
SEEDS. V—34; XV—17; KVI—4; XLVII[—41; XCVII ~1i; C 4 
SEEDLINGS. - V—34 
SEETAKAS, os XLV —~27 
SELF-CONTROLLED. re CI—4 
SEMEN. LXVIII—15; LXIX—14, 25, 33 
SENSES. - LAV —3 
SENSUAL PLEASURES. LXVIU—15; LXXXIX—11 
XCVITI~9; Cl -3 
SEPARATION, Li-i2; Cit—8 


SERPUNTS. VI~3; IX—-38; X—7; XI-62 Xi ~!4; XIII 
11; XVI—5; XXVII—6; XXXII—-17; XXXV—2; XLV 
—4; XLVI~14; XLVIII—20, 25, 31, 62; LIV—36; 
LXXXI—1; LXXXVI—42; XCV—40, 55; XCVIII 
—4; XCIX—1; C—2 
SERPENTINE. ..  LXViI—20 
SERVANTS. V—34, 69; IX—21; XV—5; XXXIX—3, XLVI 
13; LI—17; LXIX—36; LXXXVII—3; CI—6 
SERVANT CLASS. - we | XV=30 


IDE 181 

SERVITUDE. as LIL—68 

SESAMUM. V-—~-75; XV—14; XVI—37; XXV—2; XKIX—4; 

XLI--6; XLVI—35; XLVIII—30, 35, 77; LI—31; LV 
2,717: LXV—6; LXXVI—7, 9 


SESAMUM STALK. od LIV—115 
SEVEN DEITIES. | es _ V~—19 
SEVEN SAGES. XI—34; XIUI—1, 3, 4; XLVII~12 
SEVEN SEERS. ! .  XLVIII--63 
SEX. ... LXXXVI—6, 7 
SEX OF CHILD. . = LI=36, 40 
SEXU\L CRAVING. ..  LXXIV—14 


SEXUAL PLEASURE. LXIX—20; LXXV—1; LXXVIL—6 
SEXUAL UNION. LXXVI—10; LXXVIII—23, 25; XCVII 


—12; XCVIII—10 
SHADOW. ata XLVI~—-44 


SHANKS. LI-9, 34, LIT—7; LITI~51-54; LVIII—17, 21, 
46; LXI—10, 13; LXVI—1; LXVIII-—-86; LXIX—30; 
LXX-—2, 17, 24; LXXIX—30 


SHARP. we = =LXVITI-52 
SHARP-WITTED, one CiI-—3 
SHASHTIKA RICE. XXIX—3; LXXVI—8, 9 
SHAVE. XCVIII—12, 13, 14 
SH}:-BUFFALOES. XVI—-34; XLVI—53 
SHEATH. L--5 


SHLEP, ANUX—-7; XXXIX—-2; XLV-8; LI—34, LV—17; 
LXI—-16, LAXXVI—80 


SHEEP’S WOOL. a XLI—6 
SHELLS. ..  LXXXI—29 
SHEPHERDS, V—36; IX—15; XVI—i4 
SHIELDS. LVIII—40; LXIX—22 
SHINING. ... LXVIILI—102 
SHIPS. oe = XLVIJI—12 
SHODASASRI. a LVI—18 
SHOES. 55 1I—(18) 
SHOOLIKAS. fs XVI—35 
SHOOTING STARS. XXXII; XLVI—86 


SHOP KEBPER:. | ‘06 LI—2i 


182 | INDEX 


SHORT. XLIII—13; LXVIJI—35, 86 
SHORT-HAIRED, . LXXVII—17 
SHORT LIFE, LXVIU—68; CIHI—1 
SHORT-LIVED. LXVIN—9, 16; LXX—14 


SHOULDERS. LI-—8 LII—4; LIlI-—52; LVIII—25; LXI 
—12; LXVI—-2; UXVII—34; LXX—25; XCIII—3 


SHRINE (DESOLATE), ie Li—4 
SHRUBS. XLI—7; LIV—100; LV--18 
SIBEES. . IV—24; V--67 
SIBI. XI—59; XVI—-26; XVII~19 
SIBIKAS., ee XIV—12 
SIBIRA MOUNT. sie XIV—6 
SICKNESS. VINI—35; IX—37; XX!IV—36 
SICK PERSON. LI—5; LXXXVI—80 
SICKLY. LXXXVI—25; CHI—8 
SIDDHANTA, - 1T --(8) 
SIDDHARTA. VIII—48; LIII—39, 40 
SIDDHAS, XLVII—25, 55 
SIDDHI, » XLVIII—56 
SIDES. LI—9; LII—4; LIII—53; LXVIN—19, 26; LNNI 
—9; XCII-—3 
SIDE FRAME. - LVI—13 
SIEGE. VII—19; XII—20; XXXKIV—10 
SIGHT. we ~=LXXVI~—12 
SIGNS. we LXXXVI--78 
SIHLA, ... LXXVII—8, 9 
SIKHI, x LILI—43 
SIKTHA. 2  LXXXI—17 
SILA JITU. uh LXXVI—3 
SILK. XVI—30; LXXXVII—19 
SILK-COTTON. a LVII~—1 
SILKEN CLOTHS. LI—17, 19; LIV—108 
SILPIN. “4. LXXXVI-~-30 


SILVER. XI—14; XXI—23; XXVI—9; XXIX—6; XXXII 
—10; XXXIV—4; XLII—6; XLVIII—46; LI—17, 19; 

_ LXIV—1; LXXXVI~80; XCV—15 
SILVER LADLES. | we KLIV—12 


INDEX’ 183° 


SILVER MINES. - XVI—27 
SILVER VESSEL. we) LXXXIs~26 
SIMHA. V—39; XLI—4; XLII—6; LVI—18, 28; CII—7 
SINHALA. ee XI—60 
SI\' HALAKA. ..  LXXXI—2 
SIMHALESE. ‘a: XIV—15 
SIMHANADA, .. LXXXVI—20 
SIMHAPURA, a V—42 
SIMHIKA. kes v—2 
SIMSUPA. LIV—105; LXXIX—2, 12, 15 
SIN ss XII—10 
SENDHU, IV—23; IX—19; X—6; XIV—17; XVI—~10 
SINDHUKA. - LIX—6 
SINDHUS. as LRIX—11 
SINDHU SAUVEERA. ee XIV—17 
SINDHUVARA TREES. XXIX—9; LIV—101 
SINEE VALEE. .. XLVIUI—57 
SINFUL. et CI-—-3, 5 
SINFUL DEEDS. os CIII—10 
SINGED, a LXXI—10 
SINGERS. XX XII—11 
SINGING. XV~-12; XLVI—49, 61; LKXXVI—22; XCVIII—10 
SINKING WELLS. 2 LIV—123 
SINNERS. LXVIII—37, 55, 64, 80 
SIPRA. es XVI—9 


SIRISH \ FLOWERS. XXIX—4; LIV-—50; LV-—-3; LX- 
8; LXXX—6, 11; UXXXIII—1; LXXXV—4 


SISTRA. he X%C—1 
SISTER. tees LI—25 
SISU MARI. shi LIV—87 
SITTING. .. XCV~—37, 38. 
SIVA. XXXNIV—2; XLIWI-52; XLVI—10; XLVIMN—40, 77; 
LIV—3, 87; LVIIU-—-43, 53; LIX—7; LX—5, 19; LXXXVI--75 
SIVA’S EMBLEM. L—-2; LVII-—-4 
SIVA'’S HOSTS, w.  LVITI~58 
SIVA LINGAS, nee XLVI-—8 


SIVA'S TEMPLE. . oe XLVI—6 


184. noRx 


SIX FOLD PEST. "oe KLVI-42 
SIX FOLD TROUBLES. VIII—28, 40, 44 
SKANDA. XLIM—52; XLVI—11; XLVIII—26 
SKIN. XLI—6; LXVIII—87; LXIX—14 
SKIN OF LIONS. s XLI~4 
SKULLS. 1 LXXXVI-- 60 


SKY. JI—(18); XXIV~—16; XXVII—8: XXVITI—3, 45 XXX 
—22; XXXI—5; XXXII--13; XXXIV—1; XNXIX—1: 
XLIII—8; XLVI—61, 69, 86; XLVII~7, 11, 23; 


XLVITI—69 
SLY MUDDY AND DUSTY. he 1-9 
SLAVES. LXXXVII—15, 39; LXVIII-26, 36 
SLAYERS. XV—~—4, 27; XVI—13 
SLEEP. LIVI—122; LXIAX—-9 
ST.EEPY. LXXIX— ; XCHI-11; XCIV -12 
SLEEPY BEINGS. se XV I-37 
SLENDER. PVH 20. LN Vitt499 
SLESHMATAKA SEEDS. vies V7 
SLIPPER. LXXXAIX—12; XCV - 14 
SLIT. LXXI—11, 12, 13 
SMALL SHOWERS. a V—7\ 
SMARODDEEPANA. oes LAXVII--7 
SMASRUDHARAS. af XIV—9 
SMELL. XLVI—S50; L—-2); LANVIT— 34, 35; 

LXAXXIX—11, 12, 13 
SMITHS. V~-33; AXXi--3 


SMOKE. XITI—-7; XXN -21, XXAII-9; XXNAII9; ANAIV 
—6; XXXVI—3; XXXVIII--2 XLVI--2l, 22, 29, 49, 75, 
84, 86, 93; ALVII-—-10, 16; LIV—60, XCIII -3, 3; 

ACVII -13 
SMOKING. LXXXVI—13; XC- 3 
SNAKES, XVI~-34; XVII—25; XIX—9; XXV~3; XXVIIL 
—7; XXXIII—9, 28; XLIII—57, 65; LIV—17, 28, 60, 
83, 85; LXXI—12; LXXXI—25, 27, 29; LXXXL - 5; 
LXXXVI—65; LXXXVIHI—19; XCV—35; XCVII—7 
SNAKE POISON. oe IX—23 


SNARE. | ove LAXYI—2 


SNARERS. 
SNEEZING. 
SNOUT. 
SNOW. 
SNOW FALL. 
SOBHAKRIT. 
SOCIAL LEVELS. 
SOFT. 

SOFT SOIL. 
SOIL. 

SOLAR ECLIPSE. 
SQLDIERS. 


SOLES. 

SOMA. 

SOMA JUICE. 
SOMARAJEE. 
SOMAYAJEE. ° 


‘INDEX "185 


fg XV—22 
LI—29; LXVIII—63; XCW™—60 
LXI—15; XCIII—4 

= IV-—30 

XXV—5; XLVI—94 

VITI—41 

- IX -14 

LIV—91; LXVILI—73 
LIV—91 

LUI—96; LVE---9 

II—(10); V—11, 26, 91 


V—40, 41; XVII-17; XLIV—28; LI—21; 


LXAXXVII—11 
LXIX—22; LXX—~—1, 10 
Liti—45 
XVI—7 
XLIV—10 
V--70 


SON. XI[—-19; L~17; LI-25; LIl-—4, 6; LXVII—42, 49; 
LAX—l1, 14; LXSI—-11, DLXXIX—6, 23; LXXX~—17; 
LXXXI-30; LXXXV—~—3; XCV—12, 44; CIII-—5, 11, 13 


SONAKA TREE. 
SON’S DEATH, 
SONE. 
SONGSTERS. 
SONGS. 

SOOTH SAYER. 
SORCERERS. 
SORROW. 
SOSHA. 
SOUL. 
SOUNDS. 


SOUNDING. 
SOUR, 

SOUREE,. 
SOURASHTRAS. 


B.S. 24.° 


LIV=—Z3 

LI--16; LIlI—89 

XVI—9 

X—3; XVI--18; XLIII—26 
LXVIN—112; LXXXVI-—-39 
LI—21; LXXVITI—11 

eee XV—4 
XLVII—12 

ee LII-45, 63 

.. LXXV—2, 3, 4 


XLVI—61, 62; LIV—91; LXXXVI—36, 39; 


LAXZXIX—10 

one L-5 
ens LI-—-32 
ove LXXXI-—2 


X—6; XXXII—11 


“786 —CO , INDEX ° 


SOUTHERN COURSE. as VIII—15 
SOUTHERN OCEAN. | or XIV—15 
SOUTHERN QUARTER. - XII—13 
SOUTHERN ROUTE. as IX—8 
SOUVEERAKA, we CdV 23 


SOVEREIGNS. XI—10; XXXVIII~—5; XLVI—40; LXXI— 
8; LXXXVI—50 


SOW. . ww. LXXXVI—37 
SPANDANA. ... LXXIX—2, 18 
SPARKS. XLVI—22; XLVII—10 
SPARROW. LXVII—6; LXXVI—7 
SPEARS. shes LXXII—4 
SPECIES. .. LXXXVI—19 
SPEECH. XLVI—98; LI~1; LXVIIJ—101; LXX ~7; 
LXXXVI—6; XCVII—6 
SPEED. LXI—15; LXXXVI--19 
SPELLS. XIII—8; LXIX—30; C—5 
SPEND THRIFT. LXVIlI—32;  CITI—12 
SPERM. ” LXXVi—1 
SPIES. [I—(15); X—10; XVI~19 
SPIKE. wed LDXVITI—47 
SPINE. Bee LI—10 
SPIRAL. 1  LXXIX~—22 
SPIRITS. P XLVI—90 
SPITS. ss LI—32 
SPLIT. 1 LXXXV—2 
SPLITTING OF THE EARTH. .. XLVI—75, 88 
SPOKES. . LXXXVU—18 
SPORTS. : de XIX——5 
SPORTSMAN. .. LXXXVII~22 
SPORTING. | .. LXXXIX—10 
SPOTS. - UXI—7 
SPOTS PAVED AND CLEANED. ve XLV—6 
SPOTTED SNAKE. sa LIV—~42 
SPRIKKA, | eLXXVII—5, 13 
SPRING. 7 " CIV—46 


SPROUTS. we, &LVI--95 


INDEX 187 


SQUARES. LITI=55 
SQUINT. w  LX¥=19 
SRADDHA. * I-13 


SRAVANA. V-—-78; VII--2, 11; IX-—-3, 33; X—J, 16; XT 
—60; XV—20, 30; XXII-—2; XXIII—7; XXIV—26; 
XXXII—16; XXXITI~—18; XLIUI—38; XLVII—~6; 

LV—31; LX—21; LXXI—6; XCVII—16; C—6; 


CI—12; Cili—5 
SRAAVANA. .  -VII—12; XXI—9; LXXXVI~27 
SRI. XLVIII—57; C—1 
SRIDHARA. ae CV—15 
SRIKARNA., LXXXVI—38; LXXXVI[I—27 
SRIKANTA. | XLVIII—6; LXXXVI—38 
SRIMUKHA. a VIlI—31 
SRINGATAKA, 1i—(18);, Xx—2 
SRIPARNI, LIV~105; LXXIX—11, 15 
SRIPARVATA es ' XVI-3 
SRI VASAKA. LVII—3; LXXVII—11, 16, 28 
SRIVATSA. XLIN—3; LVv—45 
SROTA BHEDYA, .. LXXXVILI—6 
SRUGHNAS. - XVI—21 
STABLES. : XLV—5 
STABLE OMENS, - ... XCVI—2, 3, 4 
STAFF. XXX—16; XLII—64; XLVII-~19: 
STAG. ... LXXXVIII—33 
STAIR CASE. ws XXVIII—15 
‘STAMPEDE. ..  XXVILI~7 
STANDARD. ws XLII—$7 


STARS. I[—(18); IV—7; XVIMI—7, 8; XIX—2; XXIII—5; 
XXV—5; XXVII—8; XXXII—13; XXXII—17; XLVI— 
21; XLVIII—26, 69; XCVINI—1-3 


STARVATION. XLVI—45; LXXXVII~—36 
STATIONARY BEINGS. .» XLVIII—~68 
STATIONARY OBJECTS. eg XLVI-—5 
STAVES. ve LXIX—17 
STEALING. 7 see XCV—1t! 


STEALING NATURE. wo» LXVIII—-62 


188 ! 
STEAM. 

STEEL, 

STELLAR DEITY. 
STEM. 

ST.CK. Ili—3; 


STINGY MEN. 
STINKING. 


STOMACH. LI—26, 37; 


STOMACH TROUBLE. 


LIV--60 

» LAXXVIT—26 
Cv—5 

LV-—7 


XLVI—77; LXXXV—1, 2, 4; 
LXXXIX—1; XCV—12, 40 


XVI—36 
. LXXXVI—-79 


LIN—53; LXI—16; LXVI—2; 
LXX—25; XCIW—2 


we LXXIX—29 


STONE. XLVI—42, 77; LIV—34, 46, 107, 110; LX—4; 


LXXXVI—61; LXXXIX~1; XCV—42 
STORE ROOM. LXVIII—48 
STOREY. LVI—29 
STORMS. IlI—9; VIU—28; XXXVI—4; XLVI—4; 

LXXXVII—37 

STRAIGHTFORWARDNESS. LXIX—8 
STRANGER. XCV—42 
STRAP. XCV—42 
STRAW. LXXXIX—6; XCV—36 
STRENGTH. XLVI—28; LK—4; LXXVII—35; LXXXVI—19 
STREAMERS. XXXVI—5 
STRI. XCV—55 
STRI RAJYA. XIV—22, XVI—6 
STRIFE. X—20; XI—10, 52; LXXXVII--38 
STTHANA. 1i—(14) 


STTHANA BALA. 


STTHIRA KARANA. 


STUNTED. 
STUNTED TREE. 
SUBHAKRIT. 
SUBHANU. 
SUBJECTS. 
SUBRAHMANYA. 
SUBSERVIENT,. 
SUBSTANCES, 


1I—(14)* 

C—1 

LXI—9 

a LIX—3 
3 VIII~41 
are VIN—35 


XXXVIII~—-3; XLVITI—81 
XLITI—45; LVII—41; XCIX—1 


ose XCITI—13 


,  XLI-1;, XLVI--26 


INDEX 189 


SUBSTANCES PERTAINING TO THE PLANETS, II—(14) 

SUBTLE, sve LXXW-—-4 

SUCCESS. XLVII—79; LXXII—-6; LXXXIX~1; XCII— 
4, 12; XCV—~37, 41 

SUCCESSFUL, -» MCVITI—17 

SUDRAS, V—29, 32, 56; VIII--52; IX—~15, 40; X—2l; 

XIV—17; XVI—31, 35; XVII—16; XXXI—4; XXXIII 

—14; XXXIV—19; XXXVI—1; XXXIX—2; LIII~ 

—13; LIX—6; LXXII-—-4; LXXX~11; LXXXVI 


—34; XCV—54 
SUFFERINGS. LXX—21, LXXXIX—19; XCV—32 
SUGANDHA MUSHIKA., + LXXXVITI-5 
SUGAR. NXLVIII—31; LXXVI—6; LXXVII—11 


SUGAR CANE, VIII—30; XV—6; XIX~—6, 16; XXIX—13; 
XLII—5; XLIUI—57 


SUGREEVA. we LITI~44, 63 
SUHMA, V—-37; XIV—5; XVI—1 
SUKARA. LXXIX—32, 34, 36; LXXXVIII—9 
SUKARA PADI, ose LIV—48 
SUKARIKA, LXXXVIII—9; LIV—-88& 
SUKLA. sia VIII--29 
SUKRA. we «= LXXXVI—1 
SUKSHETRA. se LIN—37 
SUKTHI. cae IV-~-24 
SULA. ~ XI—32 
SULIKAS. IX—15, 21, X-7 
SULPHUR. .. DLXXXII—I] 
SUMMER. aa XLVI—87 
SUMMER CROPS. VIII--47; IX—43; XXV-—-2; XL-—1, 3, 4 
SUMPTUOUS. ais LI--29 


SUN. I[V-—-1-4; VI——1; VII—1, 17, 19; VITI~-24; XI—~—22; 
XI[—-22; XV—-31; XVI-—-1-5; XVIT-—-6; XIX--1-3; XX 
—1l; XXI—-14-18, 19-22, 33; XXII-—4-8; XXIII—10; 
XXIV—22; XXV—5; XXVI--3; XXVII—1, 8; XXVIII 

3, 8, 16, 20, 22; XXIX~—10; XXX-—-2, 3, 5, 7, 15, 18, 

23, 24, 26, 30, 33; XXXI—-2; XXXU-9; XXXII-~12, 

13, 17; XXXIV—~I, 7, 8, 9, 16;, XXXV—}; XXXVI— 


190 . INDEX 


2; XXXVII—1, 2, 3; XXXIX—1; XL—1-8,10-14, XLT 
5-14; XLIII—5, 6: XLIV—1, 23; XLVI—44, 46, 68, 
“4 93; XEVII—11, 19, 20, 23, 24, 26, 27; XLVIII-— 
56: LIV—106, 109; LVIII—52; LX—19, 22; LXVIII 
- —94; LXIX—3; LXXXI—20; LXXXIX—2; XC—5; 
3 XCVI—1; CIII—1-12; CIV—4-7, 54 
SUN BEAMS. XXVIII—18; XXX—8, 16, 31 


SUN'S COLOUR. _ TIl—21, 23, 29, 30, 38 
SUN'S COURSE. II—(18); 1111, 3, 5 
SUN’S DISC. III—6, 8, 12, 17, 18, 20, 29 
SUN’S ECLIPSE. V—11, 18, 26, 91 
SUN GOD. XLIV—6; LVIII—46, 52 
SUNHEATED VESSELS. ..  XXIV—30 
SUN’S RAYS. 111-22, 25, 36; XXX—9, 10, 11, 13 


SUN RISE. I[1—33, 35; XXVIII—16, 17; XXX—75; XXXII 
—17; XXXVIEH—~—4; XXXIX—2; XLVII—26; LXXXIX—2 
SUN SET. HI—33, 35; XX~—3; XXVI—15; XXVII—2, 4, 6; 
'  -XXKVHI—16, 17; XXXIUI-—-17; XXXIV~8; XXXIX—4; 
XLVI—75, 79; XLVII—23, 26; LXXXIX-~4 


SUNASSEPA. .. XLVILI--66 
SUNKEN. ..  LXVIII-70 
SUPPLIANTS. es LVIII-—-38 
SUPPORT. ee LIII--29 


SURASENAS. V—35, 69; IX—11, 17; XI-—-54; XIV—3; 
XVII—13, 22; LXIX~-26 


SURASHT RAS. V—79; LXXK—6; LXXXI—2, 4 
SURASHTRIANS. ..  LXIX—11 
SURASA, .. XLVITI—57 
SURAT. a 1V—22 
SURGEONS. os V—80 
SURPAKARNAS. - XIV—5 
SURPA MOUNTAIN. ” XIV—14 
SURYA. ss LIlI—52 
SURYA SIDDHANTA. 25 XVII—1 
SUSARA’ GEM. _ ; vse LXXXVII—23 


SUTEE. - | was, LXXXVI—41 


INDEX 19! 


SUVARNA. we LXXXI—16 
SUVARNA PUSHPA. XXIX—10; xIV—9 
SUVEERA. | ie X—6 
SVA. .. LXXXVIU—9 
SVAHA. 7 ww.  XLVIII—56 
SWAKSHETRA, on LXIX—1 
SWAMUKHAS, = XIV—25 


SWAN. XII-—8, 11; .XXXIII—10; XLIV~—24; XLVIII—10; 
LVI—-5, 7; LVIU—57; LXVITI—115; LXIX—24, LXxX 
—7, LXXITI—-1; LXXXVI—22, 27 


SWAN-WHITE. ..  LXXXI~3 
SWARM. a XCH—2 
SWASTTHIKA, L—2; LIII—34, 36; LXVIII—46; LXx 
—10; LXXI~—13 
SWASTTHIKA FIGURES. ies LVI—15 


SWASTTHIKA SIGN. XXXII—10; L—2; LITI—34, 36 
SWAItI Il—(18); VIL—-9; IX—2, 16, 31; X—1; Xi-—-57; 
XIV--19; NV-—-13, 29; XXI—~29; XXII—2; XXIII—6; 
AXV—1, 2, 4, 5, 6; XXVI—~11, 12; XXXII—8; 
XXNI[I~—18; LX—21,; LXXI—4; CI—8 Cli—4 


SWEATING. . -XCVII-6 
SWEATY. we LXXVIN—17 
SWEET DISHES. ee LI--31l 
SWEET DRINKS. wan XLITI—38 
SWEET FOOD. a XLV—7 
SWEET HEART. w. LXXVI~2 
SWEET JUICES. XVI—25; XLVI—85 
SWEET LIQUIDS. XXXVITI-—7 
SWEET MEATS. XLIM—38 
SWEET PUDDING. XCV—20 
SWEET THINGS. XVI—7 
‘SWEET TONGUED. CI—2, 6 
SWEET WATER. LIV—9 
SWELLINGS. XXX II—10, 18 
SWETAS. ——«KVI~38 
SWETAKETU. + KI—-37, 3°, 40 


SWIFT .NAKSHATRAS. 


XCVITT-9 


192 é | INDEX 


\ 4 

SWINE HERDS. — ot XVI~33 
SWORD. II—(18); XVII~—4; XIX—3; XXXI~—2; XLIUI~ 
47; XLVI-~23; L—1, 3-19, 25; LVIM—32; LXVIII— 

47; LXIX—17, 22, 34; LXX—2; LXXX—11 
SWORDSMEN. oes XVII~26 
SYAMA. LIV—87; LV~22; LXXXV—6; LXXXVI—37: 

LXXXVHI—5, 14 


SYAMAKAS. os XIV~—28 
SYAMA CREEPER. . XXIX—23 
SYANDANA. _ LIX—6 
SYMPTOMS. XXI—6, 14; XXVIUI—4; X LIV—14 
SYRRUP. a XLII—5 
T 
TABOR. 1V—20; XLVIII—49; LXIX—22 
TADAGA BHEDYA. .. LXXXVIII—6 
TAGARA. LI—15; LXXVII—S5 
TAHARA. - XVI~25 


TAIL, V—-6; LXI—-12, 15, 18; LXT—1, 2; LXVI--1; 
LXXII—~—]; XCIII--7; XCV-—-35 


TAILORS. = X—9 
TAITILA. a C1 
TAKSHA, we) LXXXKI—25 
TAKULI. cals XCV—56 
TAKUTAKU. oa XCV—56 
TALAS. asi XIV—22 
TALE BEARER. XVI~—19; LXIX—33, 35 
TALI KATAS. Ses XIV—11 
TALONS. he LXI—1 
TALKING. . ... XLVI~30, 49 
TAMALA FLOWER. a XXI—23 
TAMASA KEELAKAS., III—7, 8, 11, 12; XI-~22; XXI-—-25 
TAMARIND, TREE. sa LV—2l 


TAMRA LIPTA. _ X14; XIV-7 


mivE* 193 


TAMRAPARNI RIVER, XIV—16; LXXXI—2, 3 
TANGANAS, IX—17; X—12; XIV—29; XVI—é: XVIL—25; 
XXXII—15 
TANK. V—77, XIX—16, 20; XXXII~14; XLVI—50; 
LIV—119 
TANTRA. a I—9 
TAPASAS. ww. LXXXVI~—29 
TARA. XXXII~—2, 3, 7 
TARAKSHITI. an ae XIV—21 
TARNISHING., ie XX—6 
TASKARAS. XI—20 
TASTES. VI—2; XLVI—35, “50; XCVII—13 
TASTELESS WATER. ww. XXVII—4 
TATATIATA., ... LXXXVIIL—36 
TAWNY. oe XLVI -86 
TAXILA. X—8; XIV~—25; XVi—26 
TEACHER. be LI -21 
TEAK, LEXXV--4 


TEARS. LXI~—2; LXVIIN~73; LXXXIX—10: XCil~]; 
XCII—14; XCIV—12 

EEKSHNA NAKSHATRAS. .. XCVIIT—7, 11 

TEEPH, LXI-3; LXV—-1; LXVI—5; LXVII—3; LXVIII 

—52, 37, 101; LXTX~—10, 20; LXX—6, 21; LXYVITI 
20) LX Yj 

TEMPER. .. LXVUI—110 

TEMPERATURE. a XCVIi——4 

VEMPLES, t—(8); XLIT—-13; XLV—4; XLVI—2, 20; 

XLVil{—15; LII--3; LIII—89; LVJ-~1, 2, 9, 10, 11, 31; 

LVII—-4; LVUI—3, 6; LIS—2; LXVI—2; LXVI'—70; 

LXIX—13, 15,5 LXXIX—4; LXXXVI—17; XCV—5, 34 


TENDER HEARTED. XV—18 
TENDER NAKSHATRAS. .  XCVIII—10 
TENDERNESS. .  _LXXII-2 
TERRACE. . LX VE-2 
TERRESTRIAL. .. LXXXVI~6 
TERRESTRIAL KETU. we XT 2, 4 


TERRESTRIAL PORTENT, XXI—-25, 26; XLVI-—-2, 5 
B. 8, 25. 


194 INDEX 


‘ 


TESTES. ws LXXVI~—7 
TESTICLES. LI—8; LII—6; LXI—5, 16; LXV—7; 
LXVIH-—9; LXVIII—9; LiX—24 
THAMONTHYA, wats V--43, 52 
THANESWAR. eee XV I-32 
THAPASASRAMA. . XIV—15 
THARANA., - VILI—36 
THASKARA, .. LXXXVI—3I 
THEEKSHNA. se VitiI—&, 10 
THEFT, ves XCV—11 
THICKNESS. Bes LUI—30 


THIEVES. IV—27, 29; V—-31, 42, 60, 94; VII—7, 18; VIII 
7,17; X—9; XV—4, 16; XVI—4, 15, 34, 36; XVII— 
16; XXII—3; XXXI—4; XXXIJI—19; XXXIX—3; 
XLIN—63; LI—21, 24, 26; LXVIII—65; LXIX— 
27; LXXXVII—10, 31, 36, 37) LXXXIX—3, 4, 13; 
XClII~1; XCV—7, 19, 40 
THIEVISH. - CI—7 
THIEVISHNESS. o LXX—21 
THIGH. LI—8, 41; LII—7; LIII—53; LVIII—17, 22, 46; 
LXVI—1; LXVIMU—4; LXIX—32; LxX—2, 24 
LXXXVI—67; LXXXIX—11 


THIN. .  LXVIII—87 
THIRST. XXVII—4; LITI-—90 
THIRSTY. LXVHI-—116; CI-—4 
THITHTHID. .. LAXXVIT—11 
THONG. ww. LUXAXXIX—1 
THORN. LIII-60; XCV—40 
THORNY. XLITI—-13; LI-3 


THORNY TREES. LII-—-86; LIV-—-53; LXXIX—4; XCV 
-—17, 33, 37, 38, 59 


THREE FRUITS. | - XVI—29 
THREEFOLD PORTENTS. XXI—25-26; “XXIII—10 
THREE WORLDS, - VI-6 
THROAT. IX—42; LI-8, 34, LXVI—2, 3 
THROBBING. - a Lil—9 


THRONE. XLVIII—46; LxX--7 


THUMB. 


INDEX 195 


LI—8, LII—8; LVITI—28; LXVIlI—42, 49; 


LXX—1é 


THUNDER. V-—93; XXI—16, 22, 25, 31, 32, 37; XXIV—19; 
XXVII[—-12; XXX—32; XXXII—17, 23; XXXIX—l, 2: 


XLVI—4, 84; LXXXVI—S59; 
ITI—10; V-~-58, 63; 


THUNDER-BOLT. 


XCV—17; XCVII—6 
IX~39; XIL[—7: 


XXI—33; XXIV—-25; XXXII—6; XXXNI—1, 4; Xxxvr 
—4; XLVI—84; LVIII—42; LIX—3; LXXIX—3, LKXx—18 


THWASHTA. VII—23, 37; XLIII—46; XCVII—4 
TIARA. I—(18) 
TIGER. XXIV—15; LI—19; LXVIII—17, 37, 103 
TIGER SKIN. XLVITI—44 
TIGER’S EYE. LXXX~9 
TIGER-LIKE. LXIX—14 
TILA. LIV~—119 
TILAKA. . LXXXVil—z4 
TILAKA TREE. XXIX—6; LIV—37, 50 
TIMBER, XLIV—3; LXXIX-~37, 38 
TIME. LI—1 
TIME LIMITS. XXXII—27 
TIMELY RAINS. V—50 
TIM:D. LXVINI—114: CI—3 
TIMiNGILASANA. XIV—16 
TIMIRA. LV—i1 
TINDUKA. LI—17; LIV—50, 112, 115; LIx—6; LXXIX—2, 15 
TINDUKA FRUITS. LVII—1, 5 
TIP. L~—8; LXXIX—27 
TISHYA. LX~21 
TITHI. TI—(5), 9 
TITHIRI. ... LXXXVIII—21 
TITTIRA BIRD. XXVIII—17 
TOCHARIANS. XVI—6 
TODDY. IX—34; XVI~14; XLVIII—28 
TODDY DISTILLERS. X—17 
TODDY SELLER. LI—22 


TOES. 
TCKENS OF LOVE. 


LI—8; LVIII—18, 19; LXX—16 
LXXVIII—-4 


i 


196 INDEX 


TOLERANCE. a LXIX~—14 
TONGUE,  LI—9, 32; LXI—4, 6, 10; LXV—10; LXVIII 
—53, 87, 101 
TO" ICS. XVI—23, 34: C—5 
TOO Il STICKS. LXXVII—31; LXXXV--3, 8, 9 
TOPAZ. - LXXX—5 
TORN. cg LXXI—10 


TORTOISE TI—(18)} XXVIN—14; L—22; LIII—-99; LIV 
34, 44, LXIV—1, 2, 3; LXX—3; LXVII—6, 7 
TOURISTS. LXVIII—80; XCV—41, 48 
TOWNS. VII-—19; XVI—42; XIX~—7; XXX—23; XNXIII 
—27, 30; XXXIV—10, 19, 22; XLI[I—25, 27; XLIV—3; 
XLVI—22, 36, 41, 47, 55; LIN-—-67; LIV—97; LVI 
—8; LVIII—-55; LXXXIX—18; XCI—1, 2, 3 


TOWN GATES. sas XLIN—21 
TOWNS MEN. .» MLVII—49 
TOWNS PEOPLE. XVI—13; XIX—10 
TRADE. SIX—11; LXIX—20; NCVIII-—9, Ci—-3 
TRADE GUILD. we XXXTV—19 


ARADERS, V=29: TX-—31} X-6,..7,. 475 XV Oy 13; 25, 25; 
ANUX—10; XXXII—1]; XXXIX--2; LI--21; LXXXVIT--14 


TRADING, one C-—4 
TRADING CLASS. IV—13; V—40; VII—6 
TRADING COMMUNITY. he NXXII—10 
TRAIGARTAS, IV-~—-24; XVII-—16 
TRANSPLANTING, side LV—9 
TRANQUIL, LXAXXVI—16; LXXXVII—1, 29, XC—~3; 
XCV-~20 
TRANSITS, we C1V=2, 5-45 
TRAVEL. or LXI—16 


TRAVELLERS. IX--35; XV—15; LXXXVI—-51; XCV-—- 
11, 25, 27, 28, 32, 43, 52 


TRAVELLING. LI—24; LII-—7, 8 LXVILI-—3 
TRAYAMANA. XLIV—10; XLVITI—39 
TREACHEROUS, «LL XVIII—-56, 58 


TREASURE. .XLV—12; LIV—52; LXXIX—23; XCIlI~2 
TREASURY. 7 XVI—15; XXVI—8;, LII—14 


INDEX 197 


TREATMENT OF TREES. .. ‘LV—15, 16 
TREES. Il-—9, 10; V—40; IX—38; XI—4; XV~14;°XVI 
—4. XVIL—15; XIX—5, 20; XXI—17; XXVII—3; XXVIII 
7, 8 XXIX—1, 14 XXX—6, 7; XXXII—9; XXXIII— 
4: XXXV—5; XLI—7; XLIII—16-21; XLV--4; XLVI 
—25-32, 34, 44, 85; XLVIII—37, 67; LITI~—74, 118- - 
121; LV—2, 7, 8, 18 LIX—2-6, 7-9, 12, 13; 

. LXXXVI~17; LXXXIX—1, 19 


TREE'S SHADOW. = vV—9 
TREE BARKS. 2 XLVI—41 
TREE TRUNK. ... XLITI—22, 28 
TREMOR. ... XLVI—75, 84 
TREMULOUS EYES. a LXI—9 
TRE-TRE, .« LXXXVHI—30 
TRIANGULAR. ..  LXXX—17 
TRIBES. a V—67 
TRIDENT. LVINI—43; LXIX—22, 29 
TRIGARTUAS. IX—19; X—11; XIV—25; XVI~—22; XVH—~—16 
TRIGONAL, LXXX—17; LXXXI—6 
TRIKONA. w. LXXVITI~25 
TRIISAMSA, ee 1I—(14) 
TRINETRAS. ” XIV—31 
TRIPLETS. si XLVI—52 
TRIPURA COUNTRY. ee V—39 
TRIPURI. a XIV—9 
TRIVA, w.  XLVII~65 
TRIVIKRAMA. - CV—~—14 
TRIVRIY. | .. LIV—48, 87 
TROOPS. de IX—23 


TROUBLE. V-—61; XX—3; LIl—58; LX-6; LXVIN— 
21; LXXIX—17, 29; LXXXVI-—-63; XCV—10,'19 


TRUNCATED BODY, IlIl—8; L—-3; LXXIX—25 
TRUNK. XLITI—21, 29; LXVII—3, 9 
TRUTH. : XV—18; XXVI--2 
_ TRUTHFUL. XVI—23; XLVI~-98; CI-—~1, 2, 13 
TRUTHFUL MEN. XV--5, 20; XVII--20 


TULA. - XLI—5; XLII—-8 ClI-~4 


198 . INDEX 


TUMBAVANA. side AIV—15 
TURAGANANAS, se AIV—25 
TURMOIL. sas xC—9 
TURMERIC. ine XLIV—9 
TURNIP. ae LVIII--58 
TUSHARAS. si XIV—22 


TUSKS,  II—(18); XXIV—17; LVIII—58; LXVII—6, 10; 
LXXIX—19, 20; LXXXI—21; XCIV—1, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11 


TUSKED ANIMALS, VITI-51; XIX—1; XCV—40 
TWAK, LXXVII—28, 32 
TWASHTA. se XCVILI—4 
TWIGS. XLVI~24; XLVIII-—-77 


TWILIGHT. IlI—34; KXI—16; XXVIII~14; XXX—l, 4, 
6-8, 15, 17, 20, 21-22, 27-29, 30, 32; XXXIII—16; XLVI 
~-67, 84, 87; XLVII—27; LI-—6; LXXXVI--59; XCVII—3 


TWINS. XLVI—52, 53, 54, 55 
TWO MOONS. we XLVII—1 
TWO SUNS. .. XLVII~1L 
U 
UDDRAS, | io V—35 
UDAYAGIRI, ~ XIV—7 
UDDEHIKA. - XIV—3 
UDGARI. a VIII—50 
UDRA. + XVI—25 
UDUMBARA. V—40; XIV—14; XVI~3; XLIII—15; XLIV—4 
UDVAMSA. .. XLIUI—47 
UGLY. ..  LXIX—39 
UGRA NAKSHATRAS. ..  XCVIII—8 
UJJAIN. X—15; XI—~35, 56; XII—15; LXIX—30 
UJJEHANA, - XIV—2 
ULCERS. a LII—10 
ULKA. we CV 28 


ULLEKHA. , ove XVII—3 


INDEX 199 


ULUKA CHETL . LXXXVII-—4 
UMBRELLA. IJI—~—18; XVI—24; XXX~—27; XLIII—7, 57, 
63; XLIV—27; XLV—5; XLVI~—31; XLVIII—73; L—2; 
LXVIII—45; LX¥X—10; LXXI—13; LXXII—4; LXXIII 

—3, 4, 5, 6; LXXIX—21; LXXXIX~1; XCV—14; 


XCVH—11 
UNCLEAN. oe LXX~21 
UNCLEAN WOMEN. = XLVI—79 
UNCLEANLY, ; : ~~ LXVII—113 
UNCHASTE. LXX—19; CIII—10 
UNDERTAKING. LXXXVI—~61; LXXXVII—4; XCVIII—17 
UNERRING. w. XLVII—20 
UNFAVOURABLE. ' LXXXVI—36, 40 
UNFORTUNATE. LXVIII—54; CI—13; CItl—4 
UNGENTS. XVI~—28; LXXVII—1 
UNGRATEFUL. st CI—3, 5 
UNGRATEFUL MEN, Ls XVI—36 
UNHAPPY. tes LXX—22 
UNINTELLIGENT. es LXIX—34 
UNION, ~ XLV~8; LXXIV—20 
UNIVERSE. we) XXXIV~—17 
UNJUST. - V-—-97 
UNPLEASANT NEWS, oF XC—9 
UNREST. .. = =XXXI—11 
UNRIGHTEOUS MEN, .. XVI—32, 39 
UNSAFETY., XVI—41; XXXIV—~6 
UNSHAKY. ..  LXVUI—74 
UNSTABLE OMENS. 1 XCVI-~-2-4 
UNSUNKEN. we LXVIIT~60 
UNTOWARD. - IX—8 
UNTOWARD EFFECTS, ms XI—17 
UPACHAYA. = LX-~21 
UPAGITI. ” CIV—49 
UPAJYOTISHIA. = XIV—3 
UPANANDEE. ..  XLIWT—-39 
UPANAYANA. .. XCVITI—-16 
UPARICHANDRAVASU. se XLII—68 


200. : INDEX 


UPAVANGA, . ! on XIV—8 
UPHEAVAL. ue XLVI—88 
UPPER LIP. a LILI—28 
UPSIDE. a LIX~—7 
URDHVAKANTAS. 7 XIV—8 
URINATING, .. LXXXIX—1 
URINE. | as LI—27 
URSA MAJOR. es II—(18) 
URVA. .  XLVII[—66 
USANAS. sat L—23 
USEENARA. IV—22; X1—55 
USIRA., bee LIV-—100 
USRA. .. LXXXVUI-—-9 
USURY. ee X—-16 
UTKALA. - XIV—7 
UTPATAS, w. XLVI—1, 2 
UITARAPANDYA. ssi XVi 10 


UTTARABHADRA. VII-—5, 10; IX—2, 35; XK-—-—17; .° -60; 
XV-~24, 28; XXI-—-28; XXIII—8; XXXII—2); XNAILII 
—18; LIV—i23; LV—31; LX—21; LXXI~—7; CI-—-14; 
CIT--6 
UTTARA PHALGUNI. VII—5, 10; IXN—2, 29, X—8; NI 
—56; XV—-10, 28; XXIII—8; XXXII--8 XANIF! fa; 
LIV-—i23; LV—31; LX—21; LAXKI—3; Cl--7, «if--+3 
UTTARASHADHA. VII-—2, 11; VUI-19; IX—-33; N—15; 
XI—59; XV—19, 28; XXI-—-28; XX{II—8; ANVI-1}; 
XXXITI—19; LIV—123; LV-—31; LX--21; LXaAT 
—6; CI-—11; CII-53 


UTTARAYANA. pe V --32 
UTTERANCES. ‘ai AXCVIT—10 


VACHA. XVI—30; XLVITI-39; LVII—1 
VADAVAMUKHAS. _ & ae XIV—17 


VAMANA. 
VAMANAKA. | 
VAMAPAYU. 
“VANA FLOWER. 
VANA) R‘JYA. 
VANARASHTRAS. 
‘VANAVASI. 


Be. 26. 


INDEX 204 


VAIDHRITI. _— C—8 
VAIDURYA. XIV~14; XxIK—8 
VAIHAYASAS, wwe XLVIII—62 
VAIKANTAKA. LXXXV-—3 
VAIKHANASAS. XLVI1I—62 
VAIMANIKAS. XLVIII—61 
VAISAKHA, V-~75; VIII—9; XXI—22; XXV—-6; XLVI 
—85; XCV—2 

VAISHNAVA. LXXXVI—33 
VAISYAS. V-—30, 32, 57; VIII—-52; X—7, 21; XII—19; 

XIV—21; XXXI—3; XXXIHI—14; XXXVI—1:; LUI— 

13, 91; LIX—6; LXXII—-4; LXXX—11; LXXXVI-—-34 
VAJRA. Iv—-19; XX—2; XX!—2 
VAJRA REKHA. LXVIIi—45 
VAJRA SANGHATA. LVII—8 
VAJRATALA. LVII~—7 
VAKTRAMUSHNA. VI-1 
VAKULA. LIV—119 
VALA. LXXVII~—13 
VALAKA. LXXVII—13 
VALEYA. . LXXXVIUI—5 
VALHEEKA. IX—~10 
VALHIKAS. ' V—80 
VALLA BLOSSOMS. LXXX—7 
VALOROUS MEN. V—-39 
VALOUR. LXIII—3; LXIX—5; LXXV—7 
VAMA HANU. V—81, 83 
VAMA KUKSHI. : vV—81 
VAMAKUKSHI BHEDA. i V—85 


LXV—9; LXVII~9; _-CV—~14 
. LXIX—31, 32 


Ss V—81, 86 
_ X—21 
is XIV—30 
Ee XIV—29 


XIV~12;' XVI-6 


202 . 2 INDEX 


VANGA. V—-72, 79, IX-—10; X—14; XI—60; XIV—8; 
XVI}; “XVII~-18, 22; XXXII—15 


VANIK, ve C—1, +: 
VANIRA, = LV—10 
VANJULA. XLVITI--6; LIV~50; LV--11; LXXXVI—48; 
XCV—~16 
VANJULAKA. we LXXXVUT—5 
VANOUGHA. a XIV—20 
VAPOUR, ..  XXVIII-—6 
VAR HAMITIRA. we) LXXXV!—4 
VARAH IL ~ LIV—-87 
VARDHAMANA, LIII—33, 36; LXXI—13; LXXIX—21 
VARDHMANA FIGURE, ie L—2 
VARGAS. oe T1—(14) 
VARICHARA. a4 XIV —14 
VARIEGATED. si 1LI—38 
VARSHA, = 11-—-(6) 
VARSHAPA. ” 11—(14) 
VARSHA RITU. sip II~—23 


VARUNA, V—19, 22; XI—26; XII—14; XXIV-—-8; XXXII 

—7; XXXIV-2; XLIII—44, 52; XLIV—-6; XLVI—51; 

LUI—44, 53; LIV—3, 124; LVIJI—57; LXXXI—7; 
LXXXVI—75; XCVITI—5 


VASA KETU, ae AXI—29 
VASAKA, we = UXXRV—7 
VASATEE. XIV—-25; XVII—-19 
VASI FRUIT. sis LXXX—-16 
VASIKA, rc LV—22 
VASISHTA. IIl~(4); XI—34; XIII—9; XXIII—4; LVIII—8 
VASISHTA GOTRA, Sei V—72 
VASSAL, see LXIX—23 
VASU. XLHI-9;. XCVIL—5 
VASUS, XLVIII—56; XCIX~1 ° 
VASUDEVA, .  LXIX—32 
VASUDHANAS., 069 ,  RIY—25 
VASUKI— a. = L&XXI—25 


VASUMAT. : at XIV—-24 


INDEX 203. 


VASUNDHARAS. | w = -XLITI—40 
VASTUNARAS, - LItI-~73 
VATA, 5. LIN—41 
VATADHANAS. XIV—26; XVI~22 
VATAPI, Re XIL~13 
VATSA. X—5; XIV—2, 8 XVIT~22 
VATSANABHA, LXXIX--32, 34, 36 


VAYU. XXXIV—2; 3;, XLIII—44; XLVIII—77; LXXX~10; 
LXXXI—8; LXXXVI—75; XCVHI--4 


VEDAS. XII—19; XV—11; XXVI—4; XLVIII—49 
VEDAS MRITEE. a XVI-~32 
VEDIC BENEDICTION. vw LXXXVI~39 
VEDIC EXPERTS. i, “ORVIISS 
VEDIC SCHOLARS. XVI—-24; XLVIII—30 
VEDIC STUDIES. - XIX=11 
VEGETATION. vs LIV~95 


VEIIICLES, IX—43; XLVI—27; XLVINI~68; LtI—7; xc 
—9; XCV—I4, 48° 


VEINS. LXI~5; LXVITI--111 
VENA. IV—-26; XVI-9 
VENA RIVER. ven XIV—12 
VENOMOUS CREATURES. 2 og XI—45 
VENUMATEE RIVER. as XIV—23 


VENUS, 1V—21, 22 V—6l, 67; IX—the whole XI~17; 
XVI—26-30; XVII—14, 17, 18, 21, 25, 27; XVILI—5; 
XIX—16-18; XXVIII—19, 21; XXXIV—14; XL—4, 5, 

6; XLI—-10; XLUI—48, 52, XLIV~27; XLVI—11; XLVII 
—$; LXIX—2, 5; XCVII—2; CII—1-12; CIV—4, 32-38 


VERANDAH. LI—17, 31, 32 
VERNAL CROPS. ae) OXXVIL—1 
VERNAL SEASON, XIX—18; LXXXVI~26 
VESSELS. XLU—12; LXXXIX~1; XCV—13 
VETASA. XXIX—6; LIV—101; LY—10, 22 
VETERINARY SURGEON. - XLIV—13 
VETRAVATEE. sie XVI~9 


VIBHAVA. we VILL 29 


204: INDEX 


VIBHEETAKA. ._ we =. LII—118 
VIBHEETAKA TREE. we LIV—24, 102 
VIBUDHADHIPATI. ..  LII—49-50 


VICTORY. XXXVI—4; XLIII—11, 27; XLIX—6; L—5, 22; 
LI—24; LX—4; LXIIMI—~—3; LXXII—6; LXXIX—2l; 
LXXXI—22; XCIII~—2, 3, 8; XCIV—13 


VICTORIOUS. _ | e XVII—10 
VIDANGA. we CU LV—7, 15 
VIDARBHA, ” XIV—8 
VIDARBHAS. ” IX—27 
VIDAREE. . LUI—83 
VIDARIKA. ..  LXXVI-9 
VINDEHA. V—41, 71; IX—13, 21; XVI—11, 16; XXXIT~22 
VIDHATA. 's XCIX—1 
VIDISA, ae XVI-31 
VIDURATHA, XLVIII—66; LXXVII—1 
VIDYADHARA. IX—27; XUI—8 
VIGILS, .. LXXVUI—1 
VIJAYA. VIII—38; XLII—40 
VIJAYACHCHANDA. ..  LXXXI—31 
VIKACHA, ” XI~19 
VIKANKATA. ..  XLYII—42 
VIKARI. es VIII—39 
VIKRAMA, e VIII—34 
VIKRITI. sas VII—37 
VILAMBI. - VILI—39 


VILLAGES. XIX—-7; XXX-~—-3; LIV—97; LXXXVI—24, 64; 
— LXXXIX—~—18; XCI~1 


VILLAGE BIRDS, = XLVI—66 
VILLAGE CEMETERY. we LXXXIX—14 
VIMALAKA, _ ee LXXX—4 
VIMANA CHANDA. 1 LVI-17, 22 
VIMISRA, | .  VII-8, 14 
VINATA. : | / wee XLVITI~57 
VINDHYA. XH—1; XVI—12; XLIII[--35; LXIX—30 


VINDHYA FOREST. 


ees 1 XVI-3 
VINDHYA RANGE, . 


on XIV--9 


INDEX 205 
VINDHYA VASI. 


o, CIIT 
VINDICTIVE MEN. XVI—-15 
VINES. XLI-—3; LV—4, 10 
VIPASA RIVER. XVI—21 
VIRANA GRASS. LIV—~47 
VIRATA. oe LV-—-24, V—37 


VIRGINS. X—8; LXXVII-—9; LXXXKVI—~-45, 79; LXXXIX—5 
VIROCHANA.: 


LVIII—30 
VIRODHAKRIT. VIII-—-43, 44 
VIRODHI. VIII—37 
VIRTUE. XV—23; LIII-~67; LXXV~—8, 10; LXXXVII—4 
VIRTUOUS, CI—5, 8, 10, 14; CIlI—11 
VIRTUOUS DEEDS. | VItI--9 
VISAKHA, IV—6; VII—12; IX—3, 31; X—11, 19; XI—58; 


AV-~-14, 30; XXIII—-8; XXXII~12; XXXIII—19:} XLVI 

11; XLVII—-18; XLVIII~26; LV—31; LXXI—4; 
Ci--9; CIi—4 

LXXXVI—32 

VIWI—-21, 23, 25, XV—20; XLIII—30; XLIV—6; 

XLV{i~11; XDLVINI—-26, 55; LVIHI~31; LX—~19; 

LXVIUI—94, LXXX—8; LAXXI-7; ‘LXXXVII—25; 
XCVIII~—5; XCIX~1 


VISHAGHATIKA., 
VISHNU. 


VISHTI. uk C—1, 4 
VISITATIONS. . XLVI~28, 36 
VISWAKARMAN. XLIUI—42; XLVI—~12; LVI~29; 
LXXIX—10 
VISWARUPA, XI—23 
VISWAVASU. VIlI—41 
VISWEDEVA. VIII—23, 41; XLIII—47; XLIV—6; 
XCVIII—5; XCIX—1 
VISWESWARI. .. XLVII—-39 
VITAKA, XVI—2 
VITASTA. sts XVI-~27 
VITATHA. | LITI—44, 53, .63 
‘ VIVASWAN. .. LIII—46, §3 


VOICE. LXIII—3; LXVIII—85, 95; LXIX—5; LXXVII-~- 
— 345° LXXXVI—19, 63 


206 INDEX 
VOKKANAS. " XIV—20; XVI—35 


VOLUPTUOUS. a cIl—7 
VOMITS. ies XLV~12 
VOWS. XV—2; XVI—20, 33; XCVII[—16 
VRATYA. . LXXXVII~39 
VRIDDHA GARGA. = XIN~-2 
VRISCHIKA. V—40; XL—1-6, 8, 10; XLI—6; XLII—9; 
CIlI—4 


VRISHA. VIII—33; LVI—18, 26; C—2 
VRISHA, (IsLAND) . XIV—~-9 
VRISHABA. V—36; IX—1, 2, 4; XL—1, 7; XLI—3; Cll—1 


VRISHABHA SANKRAMANA. se XLU—3 
VRISHABHA DHWAJA., oss XIV—5 
VRITTA. .. LVI—12, 28 
VRICTRA. wo XLIN—55 
“VULNERABLE PARTS. LINI—57, 58, 60, 63-64 
VULTURE. XLIII—62; XLVI—69; LXXXVI—38; KCV—46 
VYAGHRAMUKHA. - XVI—5 
VYAGHRANAKHA. | .. LXXVII-13 
VYAGHRA PADA. ‘a LIV—88 
VYALA. on VI—3 
VYALAGREEVAS. - XIV—9 
VYASA. - CVI—6 
VYATEEPATA. 3s C—8 
VYAYA. me VIII—36 
W 
WAGTAIL. XLV—1-12, 14-16 
WAIST. LVIII—47, 56; LXVII—2; LXIX—10, 22, 28 
WALKING. ue XLVI~30 
WALL. LIN—23; LVII—4; LXXXIX—9. 
WANDERINGS, eee LI—4; CIl—6 


WAR, III-~30, 32; IV—10; V—24, 57, 59, 60; VI—8; Vil 


INDEX 207 


—16; VITI—-32, 42, 46; IX—38, 44; X—2, 20; ,XI—30, 
38, 52; XVII—5; XIX—3; XX~—1, 2: XXVII—4; KXX 
—4, 9, 27; XXXI-—2; XXXIV—6, 11, 16; XXXV— 

4; XLII—2; XLIII—28; XLVI—19, 23, 25, 27, 40, 

43, 76; XLVII—~7, 8, 11, 26; L—5; XCV—46 


WARBLING., oa XLVI—69 
WARFARE. ” XXX—25 
WARM GROUND.” . ee LIV—94 
WARM SPOT, ae, LIV—94 
WARRIORS. V—65; K-13; XV—19; XVI~13: XXXII—11; 
XX X1X—2 
WASHERMAN, .. X—5; XV—22 
WASHERWOMAN, .. LXXVIII—9 
WATCHES. ots NXIV—10 


WATER. V—I7, 42, 45; VIII—46; X—~1-2, 8; XII—12; 
XV—18; XVI—7; XIX—1, 8, 12, 15. 16; XXI--23, 31, 

3; NXII—4-8; XXIV-—20, 20, 36, XXV—4; XNVI-7; 
XXVII-3, 7, 9; XXVIII—2, 10, 13; XXXIT—10, 21; 
XXXIV—4; XXXV—5; XXXVII—3; XLITI—21, 32: 
XLIV—20; XLV~10; XLVI—~19, 27, 50, 91; XLVIII 

--70; L—23; LI—15, 18; LIIt—117; LIv--83-96, 
109-109, 118, 120, 122; LVI—3; LXV—5; LXIX— 

25; LXXXVI—18; LXXXIX—7; XCIV—14; XCV-~17 


WATER ANIMAL. cies V—33 
WATER DROPS. ae NAII—4 
WATER FINDING. ses LIV—1, 99 
WATERY GRAVE, se LXVII-—-9 
WATERY PORTENT. sini XLVI—S1 


WATER POTS. XXIV—26; XXXIV— ; LVITI—39, 41; 
LXX—10; LXXI~—13 


WATER PRODUCTS. a XLI—7, 8 
WATER RESERVOIRS. . - we XVI~—18 
WATER ROUTES. ais XVI—17: 
WATER SLUICE. 536 LII—74 
WATERY SIGN. ..  XXVITI—L 


WATER VEIN. LIV—23~26, 34, 40, 52, 54, 56, 61, 62, 68, 
: 69; 83, 100-102, 124 


208 INDEX 
WATERY TRACTS. _ es LIV—89 


WATEREESS PLACE. .. LIV—58, 106 
WAVES. | we XXVILI~14 
WEAL, . - XCVI—11 


WEALTH. XV—16, 18; XVIII—3, 5; XIX~—14; XLII—22; 
XLV—8, 13; XLVIII—82; L--16-19; LI—18-19; LII— 
2, 6, 8 LIlI—40, 60, 67, 89; LVIII—50; LXI—18 
LXIlI—~3; LXVIII—12, 18, 43, 51-52, 59, 62, 68, 104, 
112; LXIX~11, 17; LXX—5, 6, 11; LXXIV—4; 
LXXIX—30, 36; LXXXI—30 LXXXIV—2; LXXXV 
4,5, 6 LXXXVI—52; LXXXVII—2, 14, 25, 30, 

31, 39; XC—9, 15; XCV—44, 51 
WEALTHY. XII—19; LXVIII—7, 8, 19, 29-30, 32, 33, 40, 
43, 45, 46, 64, 70, 106; LXIX—34, 35; CI—3, 5, 6, 

13, 12, 13, 14; CIU—3, 6, 7, 10, 11, 12, 13 

WEALTHY PERSONS. XV—2, 10; XVI—27 
WEAPCNS. IV—21; V—41, 83, 88; VI—5; XI—4; XXXx—~— 
14, 17; XXXUI—9; XXXIV—8, 10, 13; XXXV—5; XXXVIL 
--2; XLII—6; XLIV—28; XLVI—19, 63, 71; XLVIII 
—73; L—2, 26; LII—?7; LVIMN—51; LXVIlI—24, 29, 
31; 37; LXXIX-32; LXXXVI—46, 59; LXXXVII 

—2, 26, 35, 37; XCV—14, 40; XCVHI—8 


WEARER. ; et LXXI—11 
WEARINESS. .. LXXKVI—60 
WEAVERS, XV~—12; LXXXVII~20 
WEDGE. LIV—124; LX—6 
WEEKDAYS. TiI—(15); C1V—61-63 
WEEPING. LI—29; LXVIII—73; XCVII—6 
WEIGHING. ass XXVI—10 
WEIGHMENT. .. LXVHI—107 
WEIGHT. LXVIII—106; LXIX—5, 18, 25, 29 
WELFARE. Ex XLVII—1 


WELLS. V—77; IX-30; XXVI—7; XLNI—49, 89; LI 
—74; LIV—77, 97, 121; LVI-2; LVII-—-4 
WELL-BEHAVED. 2 CI—I 
WELL-KNOWN. | . - LXIX~34 
WESTERN ALTAR. | .«  XLVII—34 


eof . i bp 


WESTERN COUNTRY. XVI~31; XLVN—6 
WESTERN TRACTS, se X—6 
WET FEET. ..  LYWI—124 
WHALES. ... LXXXI—1, 29 
WHALE-EATERS. - XIV—16 


WHEAT. XV-—-6; XVI-—-7; XIX-—6; XXIX—4; XLI-~2, 
3, 55 XLVI-—-33 


WHEEL, XLVI--9, 60; LXVIITI--47; LXIX-—-17 
WHIRLWIND. ii XxCV—10 
WHITE. XXIV—35; XCIV-—7 
WHITE CIRCLE. sie LXV—2 
WHITE DUST. sn XXX—-15 
WHITE FLOWERS. re LXXIX—7 
WHITE OBJECTS. ies XVI-—8 
WHOLE-HOOFED ANIMALS. re V-—78 
WICKED. V—-97; LXXIV—5 LXXVIII—16 
WICKED ACTIONS. LXVIII-—74, 113 
WICKED FELLOW. .. LXXXVI—46 
WICKEDNESS. XLVII—-6; LII~-2; LXXV—10 
WICKED PERSONS. re AIX—17 
WIDOWS. XVI—34; XXXI--3; CIII—6, 7, 8, 10 
WIDTH. ... LIITT--24, 25 


WIFE, XTI--19; XV-—-21; LI-25; LII--6, 7; LIV—98; 
LXXIV--11; DLXXVIII~—26; LKXXV—-3; LXXXVII— 
8, 41; CI--2, 11 


WILD ANIMALS. VIllI—4; XCI-—), 2, 3; XCVII-—8 
WILD CREATURES. .. LXXXVI—24 
WILD DOG. ws LXXXIX~—18 
WILDERNESS. san XVI—4 
WIND. XXVII—1, 2, 3, 4, 65 XXX—2, 31 
A mock-Sun in the South gives a strong ... XXXVII-—3 
‘Aruna Ketus born of— : ies XI-——-24 
A strong-~at the time of an eclipse. sa V—63 
Calm—, symptom of rain. “ae XXVITI-~4 
Danger arising from— we =) LXXXIX-—~4 
Danger from fire and-—— ua VILI—~49 
Days ‘sustained by fhe—s- tae XXII 


Bes, 27. 


210 . INDEX 


Destruction by— .» LXXXVIT—37 
Earth‘ shaken by— tee XXXIT—7 
Earthquake caused by— ae XXXII—2 
Effect of a rough—blowing at dawn or twilight. XXX—6 
Effect of—-at the two sides of an army. ve XXX—4 
Effect of—in the form of a Danda. as XXX—16 
Effects of—blowing during the Moon’s conjun- 
clion with Ashadha. de XX VI-~-13 
Fire assisted by——raging over the land. _ XXXH—13 
Foetuses forming among—, clouds. ne XXI~—21 
If there be fierce and stormy-— ae V—94 
Karana presided over by— oa C—2 
Mercury causes trouble through—when hes VII—1 
Phenomena connected with—s. ee 1I—(18) 
Quantity of rainfall as the result of — beh XXI--32 
Rays of the Sun and the Moon formed into a 
circle by the— wee XXXIV—1 
Sacrifice to— ses XLVI—46 
There will arise peril from—if vw  MXVITI—21 
The-~s are reverse at ads XXI—13 
Unnatural—s in winter. ae XLVI—94 
——, the lord of one of the eight quarters. ... LIV--3 
—should be foretold from the wood-apple. ... XXIX—12 
—, one of the five phenomena. ds MATHEWS, 37 
—~s will destroy the tops of mountains, od 1X—38 
WIND CIRCLE. XXXII—8, 10, 25, 27, 28 
WIND GOD. XXXII--8; XLVI—64 
WIND’S PERIOD. ... SAAIL—24, 25 
WINDOWS. XLIUI---57; LVII—4 
WINE. XIX--18; XLVI—-27; XLVIII-—-28; LXXVI—2; 
LXXXVI—46; LXXXVII-—23 
WINGS. XLV—10; XCV—11 
WINNOWING BASKETS. see XLVI-—63 
WINTER. ae XLVI-—~-94 
WINTER SEASON. we LXXXVI—-26 
WISDOM. ow. LXXXVI—-79 
WITHERED. sae LAXXV—2 


WITHERED LEAYES. ee LI--3 


INDRX 21% 


WITHERED TREE. ses Fe 
WIVES. XV—21; CXXVI—5 
WOE. add XCVI—11 
WOLVES. et LXX--22 
WOMAN. A-—is a gem. LXXIV—4; LXXX—2 
A-—with high upper lip and rough hair. — LXX-—-23 
A traveller will get a~-and wealth if i XCV—44 
Effect of a-—touching each of the several limbs 
of her body. ae LI—37-41 
King’s murder by a-— des XXIV—34 
Questions referring to a— » LXXXVI—-79 
The waist of a— aoe LXX—5 
WOMAN’S FAULT. = LI—16 
WOMAN-IN-CHILD-BED, Se LI-—20 
WOMAN'S LOVE. we LXXVIII—-15 
WOMB. .» LXXVIII—24 
WOMEN. A line touching the middle finger of a— LXX-—-22 
A meteor that is disastrons to— sas XXXITI—26 
A thunder that destroys— sig XXXIX—2 
A-—of 20 years. .» L&VIII—107 
Abundant wealth on— Sag LXX~—6 
Acquisition of— sa L—18 
Anything unnatural in— ss XLVI—13 
Cohabitation with forbidden— LXVIII—3, 25, 40, 61, 69 
Enjoyers of many— ads LXVIII-—~24 
Hands that make—unhappy and poor. is LXX-—~22 
Kind of—that should be shunned. LXXVIII—16-18 
Man becomes the idol of — Se LXXV—-6 
Men are brought into being by— pee LXXIV—11 
Misery through— ..  LIUI—67, 68 
Neck of a-- we LXX—18 
One not to be exhausted by— ee LXXVI—~-4 
Quarrel with— ww. DLXXXIX—I11 
Slandering blameless— we =©)0hd LXXTV—15 
Soul reborn in— see LXXV—g 
To be attached to-~ ee LXIX~—8 


To be conquered by LXIX—36, 38 


412 INDEX 


To enjoy— © LXVITI~12 
Weaking of diamonds by-~ .  LXXX~17 
—are never defiled. ti LXXIV—9Q 
are pure all over. ies LXXIV—8 
—are superior to men in merits, LXXIV—6 
——suffer during an earthquake of the Wind circle. XXXII—11 
-—suffer when Saturn is in Uttarabhadra. ... X—~-17 
-~-refrain from sexual act by conviction and 

courage. sae LAXIV—14 

Words of—do not fail to produce their effects. XLVI—97 
WOMEN FOLK. st V—67 
WOMEN-HATERS. Si XV—8 
WOOD. II—-(18); LINI—23; LIV—92; LX—4; XCV—18 
WOODS. a xVI—5 
WOOD APPLE. XXIX—12; Lv—22; LVII—1, 5, 7 
WOOD PECKER. XLVIti-—6; LXXXVI~—23 
WOODEN. don LITI—60 
WOOL. si XVI—30 
WOLLEN ARTICLES. ig LI~+19 
WORDS. se XLVI—97 
WORKERS. ..» LXXXVII— 44 
WORLD. X[-~-15; XLVII-—-11, 14; XLVII[—68 
WORLDLY PLEASURES. me LXXIV—-—4 
WORMS. XV—-7; XXVIITI—13; LXX-—-22; XCVII-—-7 
WORRIES. VII—-3; LII-2; LVIII-52 


WORSHIP. XLITI-—-18; XLY-~6; XLVI-—-79; XLVIII~-79; 
LIWI--112; LIX-—9; LX—14, xCV-—14; CV-—9-13, 16 


WRATHFUL PERSONS. - XVI—36 
WREATHS. ss XLII~7 
WREATHS OF FLOWERS. .. LXXVIUI—21 
WRESTLERS. V—41; IX—43; XV—19 
WRINKLES. : ce LXI~15 
WRISIS. LII-—5; LVIII—26; LXVIII—38, 44; LXX—11, 12 
WRITERS. V—74; X—10; XXXIV—14 


WRITINGS. XV 125, LXXXVI—76 


INDEX 413 
Y 


YAJURVEDA. .. XLVIMI—31 

YAKSHAS. 1I—(15); XUI—8; XLVI~—14; XLVIII—~235; 
LIV—111 

YAMA. V—2, 19, 23; XXXIV--2; XLUI-—-43, 52; XLVI— 

10; LIll—44, 53; LIV—3; LXVIII—94; LXXXI—7: 
LXXXVI—75; XCIX~1; C—1 


YAAMA. sis II—(4) 
YAMA SURYA. ee LIlI-~-40 
YAMUNA. sae XIV—2 
YAMUNAS. a XIV—25 
YANA. - II—(15) 
YASOVATEE. a XIV—28 
YASHTI. ..  LXXXI—36 
YATRA. li—(15); XLIV—14, 18; XLVIII—22, 29 


YAUDHEYAS. IV-—-25; V—40, 67, 75; IX—11; XI—59; 
XIV—28; XVI—21; XVII—19 

YAVAKREETA, .  XLVIUI~-67 

YAVANAS, I-14; IV—22; V-—-78, 80; IX-—-21, 35; X—6, 
15, 18; XNIMNI—9; XIV—18; XVI-—-1; XVIII—6 


YAYEE. ..  XVII-7, 8 
YEAR, VIMI—1, 2, 4, 22 XIX—1-21; XXVI—8 
YELLOW. ae XCV—15 
YELLOW ORPIMENTS. .  XLVIII—35 
YELLOW ROBES. .. LXXXVI—25 
YELLOWISH RICE. _ XXIX—2 
YIELD. - LV—17 
YOGA. a I1I—(15) 
YOGA VIDYA. os XIX—11 
YOGANTA. .  VII—8, 1 
YOGINS. af XV—2 
YOKE. IV—12; XI—37; XLVI—8 
YOUNG. we = LVITI—45 
YOUNG DAMSELS. 4 XV—9 


YOUNG LADIES, _ , QXXIIE-18, LI-18 


214 INDEX 


YOUNG ONES. sis XCV—6 
YOUNG WIFE. : es LII—6 
YOUNG WOMEN. VIII—7; X—10; XVI~—8 
YOUNGER PRINCES. ee LIUNI-~7 
YOUTH. .. LXXVIII~13 
YUDDHA. XVII—12 
YUDHISHTIRA. ~ XIH—3 
YUGANDHARA. ..  XXX'I~-19 
YUGAS. a: II—(6) 
YUVA. = VIII—31 
YUVARAJA. XXXIV—10, 20; XXXVI—1; XLIIT—62; 


XLIX—2, 5; LXXIII—4 


ZODIAC. zai V—6 


PRINTED BY V(68. BOOBBIAH & SONS, BANGALORE CITY, 


Works on Astrology with English translation & Notes: 


10, 


. BRIHAT JATAKA by Varahamihira (Demy 8vo 616 pages). 


Half Leather gilt, Library Edn.) 10—0—0 Full cloth 8—8—0 
Half cloth 8—3—0 [By V.P.P. Annas 9 extra] 


JATAKAPARIJATA by Vaidyanatha Dikshita—Demy 8vo, 
1360 pages. (An éxhaustive work of 18 Adhyayas in two 
volumes). Half Leather gilt (Library Edn.) 16—0—0; Full 
cloth |4—0—0; Half cloth 13—0—0. [By V.P.P. Rs. 1—2-~0 
extra] 


PHALA DEEPIKA by Manthreswara (Demy 8vo 616 pages). 
Full cloth 5—O—0; Half cloth 4—8—0, [By V.P.P. Annas 
9 extra] 


SRIPATHI PADDHATI (Demy 8vo 196 pages) Revised and 
Enlarged Edition. Full cloth gilt 2—12—0; Full cloth ordinary 
2—8—0. [By V.P.P. Annas 6 extra] 


UTTARA KALAMRITA by Kalidasa (Demy 8vo 335 pages). 
Full cloth gilt 4—0—0; Full cloth ordinary 3—12—0; Half 
cloth 8—8—0. [By V.P.P. Annas 7 extra] 


SHATPANCHASIKA by Prithuyasas (son of Varahamihira) 
(Crown 8vo 80 pages). Full cloth l—4—0; Paper cover 1-0-0. 
[By V.P.P. Annas 4 extra] 


JATAKA TATVA by Mahadeva (Demy 8vo 484 pages). Full 
cloth 5-i-0; Half cloth 4-12-0. [By V. P.P. Annas 10 extra] 


JATAKALANKARA by Ganesa (Crown 8vo 100 pages). Full 
cloth 1—8—0; Paper cover 1—4--0. [By V.P.P. Annas 
4 extra] 


JATAKADESAMARGA (Demy 8vo °350 pages). Full cloth 
4—8—0; Half cloth 4—4—0. [By V.P.P. Annas 8 extra] 


SANKETANIDHI by Ramadayalu (Demy 8vo 388 pages). Full 
tha—12—0; Half cloth 4-~8—0. 
eee [By 4.2. P. Annas 8 extra) 


if 


11, ‘BhInAT SAMHITA by Varahamihira with Text, ‘ransla- 
tion and, Notes. (Demy 8vo 1100 pages). Calico-in two vols. _ 
12—8—0, [By V. P.P. Re. 1—0—0 extra] 


In Preparation. Horasara by Prithuyasas (Son of Varaha- 


mihira) with Text, ‘Translation and Notes, 
FOR COPIES APPLY T0 :— 


Panditabhushana V. SUBRAHMANYA SASTRI, 5. a. 
65, III Cross Road, Basavangud: (P. 0.) 


